                                          The Annals of Applied Statistics
                                          2008, Vol. 2, No. 1, 113–152
                                          DOI: 10.1214/07-AOAS138
                                           c Institute of Mathematical Statistics, 2008


                                            IN-SEASON PREDICTION OF BATTING AVERAGES: A FIELD
                                            TEST OF EMPIRICAL BAYES AND BAYES METHODOLOGIES1
arXiv:0803.3697v1 [stat.AP] 26 Mar 2008




                                                                            By Lawrence D. Brown
                                                                              University of Pennsylvania
                                                            Batting average is one of the principle performance measures for
                                                       an individual baseball player. It is natural to statistically model this
                                                       as a binomial-variable proportion, with a given (observed) number
                                                       of qualifying attempts (called “at-bats”), an observed number of suc-
                                                       cesses (“hits”) distributed according to the binomial distribution, and
                                                       with a true (but unknown) value of pi that represents the player’s
                                                       latent ability. This is a common data structure in many statistical
                                                       applications; and so the methodological study here has implications
                                                       for such a range of applications.
                                                           We look at batting records for each Major League player over the
                                                       course of a single season (2005). The primary focus is on using only
                                                       the batting records from an earlier part of the season (e.g., the first 3
                                                       months) in order to estimate the batter’s latent ability, pi , and con-
                                                       sequently, also to predict their batting-average performance for the
                                                       remainder of the season. Since we are using a season that has already
                                                       concluded, we can then validate our estimation performance by com-
                                                       paring the estimated values to the actual values for the remainder of
                                                       the season.
                                                           The prediction methods to be investigated are motivated from
                                                       empirical Bayes and hierarchical Bayes interpretations. A newly pro-
                                                       posed nonparametric empirical Bayes procedure performs particu-
                                                       larly well in the basic analysis of the full data set, though less well
                                                       with analyses involving more homogeneous subsets of the data. In
                                                       those more homogeneous situations better performance is obtained
                                                       from appropriate versions of more familiar methods. In all situations
                                                       the poorest performing choice is the naı̈ve predictor which directly
                                                       uses the current average to predict the future average.
                                                           One feature of all the statistical methodologies here is the prelimi-
                                                       nary use of a new form of variance stabilizing transformation in order
                                                       to transform the binomial data problem into a somewhat more fa-
                                                       miliar structure involving (approximately) Normal random variables


                                             Received September 2007; revised September 2007.
                                             1
                                              Supported in part by NSF Grant DMS-07-07033.
                                             Key words and phrases. Empirical Bayes, hierarchical Bayes, harmonic prior, variance
                                          stabilization, FDR, sports, hitting streaks, hot-hand.

                                           This is an electronic reprint of the original article published by the
                                           Institute of Mathematical Statistics in The Annals of Applied Statistics,
                                           2008, Vol. 2, No. 1, 113–152. This reprint differs from the original in pagination
                                           and typographic detail.
                                                                                     1
2                                   L. D. BROWN

          with known variances. This transformation technique is also used in
          the construction of a new empirical validation test of the binomial
          model assumption that is the conceptual basis for all our analyses.


    1. Introduction.

   Overview. Batting average is one of the principle performance measures
for an individual baseball player. It is the percentage of successful attempts,
“Hits,” as a proportion of the total number of qualifying attempts, “At-
Bats.” In symbols, the batting average of the ith player may be written as
BAi = Hi /ABi . This situation, with Hits as a number of successes within a
qualifying number of attempts, makes it natural to statistically model each
player’s batting average as a binomial variable outcome, with a given value
of ABi and a true (but unknown) value of pi that represents the player’s
latent ability.
   As one outcome of our analysis we will demonstrate that this model is
a useful and reasonably accurate representation of the situation for Major
League players over periods of a month or longer within a given baseball
season. (The season is approximately 6 months long.)
   We will look at batting records [Brown (2008)] for each Major League
player over the course of a single season (2005). We use the batting records
from an earlier part of the season (e.g., the first 3 months) in order to
estimate the batter’s latent ability, pi , and consequently, to predict their BA
performance for the remainder of the season. Since we are using a season
that has already concluded, we can then validate the performance of our
estimator by comparing the predicted values to the actual values for the
remainder of the season.

   Dual focus. Our study has a dual focus. One focus is to develop improved
tools for these predictions, along with relative measures of the attainable
accuracy. Better mid-season predictions of player’s batting averages should
enable better strategic performance for managers and players for the re-
mainder of the season. [Of course, other criteria may be equally important,
or even more so, as suggested in Albert and Bennett (2001), Lewis (2004),
Stern (2005), etc. Some of these other criteria—e.g., slugging percentage or
on-base percentage—may be measurable and predictable in a manner analo-
gous to batting average, and so our current experience with batting average
may help provide useful tools for evaluation via these other criteria.]
   A second focus is to gain experience with the estimation methods them-
selves as valuable statistical techniques for a much wider range of situations.
Some of the methods to be suggested derive from empirical Bayes and hi-
erarchical Bayes interpretations. Although the general ideas behind these
techniques have been understood for many decades, some of these methods
                   PREDICTION OF BATTING AVERAGES                            3

have only been refined relatively recently in a manner that promises to more
accurately fit data such as that at hand.
   One feature of all of our statistical methodologies is the preliminary use
of a particular form of variance stabilizing transformation in order to trans-
form the binomial data problem into a somewhat more familiar structure
involving (approximately) Normal random variables with known variances.
This transformation technique is also useful in validating the binomial model
assumption that is the conceptual basis for all our analyses. In Section 2 we
present empirical evidence about the properties of this transformation and
these help provide justification for its use.

   Efron and Morris. Efron and Morris (1975, 1977) (referred to as E&M in
the sequel) presented an analysis that is closely related in spirit and content
to ours, but is more restricted in scope and in range of methodology. They
used averages from the first 45 at-bats of a sample of 18 players in 1970 in
order to predict their batting average for the remainder of the season. Their
analysis documented the advantages of using the James–Stein shrinkage in
such a situation. [See James and Stein (1961) for the original proposal of
this technique.] E&M used this analysis to illustrate the mechanics of their
estimator and its interpretation as an empirical Bayes methodology.
   In common with the methods we use later, E&M also used a variance
stabilizing transformation as a preliminary step in their analysis, but not
quite the same one as we propose. Our first stage of data contains some
batters with many fewer at-bats, and others with many more. (We only
require that a batter have more than 10 first stage at-bats to be included
in our analysis.) In such a case the distinction between the various forms of
variance stabilization becomes more noticeable.
   Because E&M used the same number of initial at-bats (45) for every player
in their sample, their transformed data was automatically (approximately)
homoscedastic. We do not impose such a restriction, and our transformed
data is heteroscedastic with (approximately) known variances. The James–
Stein formula adopted in E&M is especially suited to homoscedastic data.
We develop alternate formulas that are more appropriate for heteroscedastic
data and ordinary squared error. Two of these can be considered direct gen-
eralizations within the empirical Bayes framework of the formulas used by
E&M. Another is a familiar hierarchical Bayes proposal that is also related
to the empirical Bayes structure. The final one is a new type of implementa-
tion of Robbins’ (1951, 1956) original nonparametric empirical Bayes idea.
   E&M also consider a different data context involving toxoplasmosis data,
in addition to their baseball data. This setting involves heteroscedastic data.
In this context they do propose and implement a shrinkage methodology as a
generalization of the James–Stein formula for homoscedastic data. However,
unlike the baseball setting, the context of this example does not provide the
4                               L. D. BROWN

opportunity to validate the performance of the procedure by comparing pre-
dictions with future data (or with the truth). For our batting average data,
we include an implementation of a slight variant of the E&M heteroscedas-
tic method. [This is the method referred to in Section 3 and afterward as
EB(ML).] We find that it has satisfactory performance in some settings, as
in our Table 3, and somewhat less satisfactory performance in others, as in
our Table 2. We also propose an explanation for this difference in behavior
in relation to the robustness of this procedure relative to an independence
assumption involved in its motivation.

   Ground rules. The present study involves two rather special perspectives
in order to restrict considerations to a manageable set of questions. In keep-
ing with the baseball theme of this article, we refer to these as our ground
rules.
   The first major limitation is that we look only at results from the 2005
Major League season. Within this season, we look only at the total num-
bers of at-bats and hits for each player for each month of the season, and
in some parts of our analysis we separate players into pitchers, and all oth-
ers (“nonpitchers”). It is quite likely that bringing into consideration each
player’s performance in earlier seasons in addition to their early season per-
formance in 2005 could provide improved predictions of batting performance.
But it would also bring an additional range of statistical issues (such as
whether batters maintain consistent average levels of ability in successive
seasons). There are also many other possible statistical predictors of later
season batting average that might be investigated, in addition to the di-
rectly obvious values of at-bats and hits and playing position in terms of
pitcher/nonpitcher. We hope that our careful treatment of results within
our ground rules can assist with further studies concerning prediction of
batting average or other performance characteristics.
   One may suppose that players—on average—maintain a moderately high
level of consistency in performance over successive seasons. If so, perfor-
mance from prior season(s) could be successfully incorporated to usefully
improve the predictive performance of the methods we describe. On the
other hand, for working within one given season, our results suggest that
later season batting average is an inherently difficult quantity to predict on
the basis only of earlier season performance; and hence, it seems somewhat
uncertain that other, more peripheral, statistical measures taken only from
the earlier part of the season can provide significant overall advantage in
addition to knowledge of the player’s earlier season record of at-bats and
hits, and their position in terms of pitcher/nonpitcher. Possibly, division
into other player categories (such as designated hitter, shortstop, etc.) could
be useful. This was suggested to us by S. Jensen (private communication)
based on his own analyses.
                    PREDICTION OF BATTING AVERAGES                               5

   A second guideline for our study is that we concentrate on the issue
of estimating the latent ability of each player, with equal emphasis on all
players who bat more than a very minimal number of times. This is the kind
of goal that would be suitable in a situation where it was desired to predict
the batting average of each player in the league, or of each player on a team’s
roster, with equal emphasis on all players. A contrasting goal would be to
predict the batting average of players after weighting each player by their
number of at-bats. As we mention in Section 5, and briefly study there, such
a goal might favor the use of a slightly different suite of statistical techniques.
   As usual, the 2005 Major League regular season ran about 6 months
(from April 3 to October 2). It can conveniently be divided into one month
segments, beginning with April. The last segment consists of games played
in September, plus a few played in very early October. We do not include
batting records from the playoffs and World Series. For our purposes, it is
convenient to refer to the period in the first three months, April through
June, as the “first half” of the season, and the remaining three months
(through October 2) as the “second half.” (Baseball observers often think
of the period up to the All Star break as the first half of the season and the
remaining period as the second half. The All Star break in 2005 occurred on
July 11–13. We did not split our season in this fashion, but have a checked
that doing so would not have a noticeable effect on the main qualitative
conclusions of our study.)

  Major questions. We address several fairly specific questions related to
prediction of batting averages:
Q1. Does the player’s batting performance during the first half of the sea-
    son provide a useful basis for predicting his performance during the
    remainder of the season?
Q2. If so, how can the prediction best be carried out? In particular, is the
    player’s batting average for the first half by itself a useful predictor of
    his performance for the second half? If not, what is better?
Q3. Is it useful for such predictions to separate categories of batters? The
    most obvious separation is into two groups—pitchers and all others.
    Strong batting performance, including a high batting average, is not
    a priority for pitchers, but is a priority for all other players. So we
    will investigate whether it is useful, given the player’s first half batting
    average, to perform predictions for the second half batting average of
    pitchers separately from the prediction for other players.
Q4. What are the answers to the previous questions if one tries to use the
    player’s performance for the first month to predict their performance
    for the remainder of the season? What if one tries to use the first five
    months to predict the final month’s performance?
6                               L. D. BROWN

Q5. We have already noted an additional question that can be addressed
    from our data. That is whether the batting performance of individ-
    ual batters over months of the season can be satisfactorily modeled
    as independent binomial variables with a constant (but latent) suc-
    cess probability. This is related to the question of whether individual
    batter’s exhibit streakiness of performance. For our purposes, we are
    interested in whether such streakiness exists, over periods of several
    weeks or months. If such streakiness exists, then it would be addition-
    ally difficult to predict a batter’s later season performance on the basis
    of earlier season performance.
        It is unclear whether batting performance exhibits streakiness, and
    if so, then to what degree. See Albright (1993) and Albert and Bennett
    (2001), and references therein. Even if some degree of streakiness is
    present over the range of one or a few games, for all or most batters, this
    single game streakiness might be supposed to disappear over the course
    of many games as the effect of different pitchers and other conditions
    evens out in a random fashion. We will investigate whether this is the
    case in the data for 2005.
Q6. We have noted the dual focus of our study on the answers to questions
    such as the above and on the statistical methods that should be used to
    successfully answer such questions. Hence, we articulate this as a final
    issue to be addressed in the course of our investigations.

   Answers in brief. The latter part of this paper provides detailed numer-
ical and graphical answers to the above questions, along with discussion
and supporting statistical motivation of the methods used to answer them.
However, it is possible to qualitatively summarize the main elements of the
answers without going into the detail which follows. Here are brief answers
to the major questions, as discussed in the remaining sections of the paper.
A1. The player’s first half batting provides useful information as the basis
    for predictions of second half performance. However, it must be em-
    ployed in an appropriate manner. The next answer discusses elements
    of this.
A2. The simplest prediction method that uses the first half batting average
    is to use that average as the prediction for the second half average.
    We later refer to this as the “naı̈ve method.” This is not an effective
    prediction method. In terms of overall accuracy, as described later, it
    performs worse than simply ignoring individual performances and using
    the overall mean of batting averages (0.240) as the predictor for all
    players (sample size, P = 567). [If this batting average figure seems
    low, remember that we are predicting the average of all players with at
                    PREDICTION OF BATTING AVERAGES                             7

                                     Table 1
               Mean batting average by pitcher/nonpitcher and half of
                                      season

                                     First half           Second half

              Nonpitchers              0.255                 0.252
              Pitchers                 0.153                 0.145
              All                      0.240                 0.237



    least 11 first half at-bats. Hence, this sample contains many pitchers—
    see A3. The corresponding first-half mean for all nonpitchers (P = 499)
    is 0.255.]
       In spite of the above, there are effective ways to use first-half batting
    performance in order to predict second-half average. These methods in-
    volve empirical Bayes or hierarchical Bayes motivations. They have the
    feature of generally “shrinking” each batter’s first-half performance in
    the general direction of the overall mean. In our situation, the amount
    of shrinkage and the precise focus of the shrinkage depend on the num-
    ber of first-half at-bats—the averages of players with fewer first-half
    at-bats undergo more shrinkage than those with more first-half at-bats.
    The best of these shrinkage estimators clearly produces better predic-
    tions in general than does the use of the overall average, however, it
    still leaves much more variability that cannot be accounted for by the
    prediction. See Table 2, where the best method reduces the total sum
    of squared prediction error, relative to the overall average, by about a
    40% decrease in total squared estimation error.
       Not all the shrinkage estimators work nearly this well. The worst of
    the shrinkage proposals turns out to be a minor variant of the method
    proposed for heteroscedastic data by E&M, and we will later suggest a
    reason for the poor performance of this shrinkage estimator.
A3. Pitchers and nonpitchers have very different overall batting perfor-
    mance. Table 1 gives the overall mean of the averages for pitchers and
    for nonpitchers for each half of the season. (In each case, the samples
    are restricted to those batters with at least 11 at-bats for the respective
    half of the season.)
       It is clear from Table 1 that it is desirable to separate the two types of
    batters. Indeed, predictions by first half averages separately for pitchers
    and nonpitchers are much more accurate than a prediction using a single
    mean of first half averages. Again, see Section 5 for description of the
    extent of advantage in separately considering these two subgroups.
       The empirical Bayes procedures can also be employed within the re-
    spective groups of nonpitchers and pitchers. They automatically shrink
    strongly toward the respective group means, and the better of them
8                               L. D. BROWN

    have comparable performance to the group mean itself in terms of sum
    of squared prediction error. See Table 3 for a summary of results.
       One of our estimators does particularly well when applied to the full
    sample of players, and the reasons for this are of interest. This estimator
    is a nonparametric empirical Bayes estimator constructed according to
    ideas in Brown and Greenshtein (2007). In essence, this estimator auto-
    matically detects (to some degree) that the players with very low first
    month batting averages should be considered in a different category
    from the others, and hence, does not strongly shrink the predictions
    for those batters toward the overall mean. It thus automatically, if im-
    perfectly, mimics the behavior of estimators that separately estimate
    the ability of players in each of the pitcher or nonpitcher subgroups
    according to the subgroup means. This estimator and its pattern of be-
    havior will be discussed later, along with that of all our other shrinkage
    estimators.
A4. One month’s records provide much less information about a batter’s
    ability than does a three month record. For this reason, the best among
    our prediction methods is to just use the overall mean within these
    subgroups as the prediction within each of the two subgroups. Some of
    the alternate methods make very similar predictions and have similar
    performance. The naı̈ve prediction that uses the first month’s average
    to predict later performance is especially poor.
       The situation in which one uses records from the first 5 months in
    order to predict the last month has a somewhat different character. The
    difference is most noticeable within the group of nonpitchers. Within
    this group the naı̈ve prediction does almost as well as does the mean
    within that group; and some of the empirical Bayes estimators perform
    noticeably better.
A5. Our analyses will show it is reasonably accurate to assume that the
    monthly totals of hits for each batter are independent binomial vari-
    ables, with a value of p that depends only on the batter. (The batter’s
    value of p does not depend on the month or on the number of at-bats
    the batter has within that month, so long as it exceeds our minimum
    threshold.) The binomial model that underlies our choice of tools for
    estimation and prediction thus seems well justified. The somewhat lim-
    ited success of our empirical Bayes tools is primarily an inherent feature
    of the statistical situation, rather than a flaw in the statistical model-
    ing supporting these tools. A more focused examination of quantitative
    features inherent in the binomial model makes clear why this is the
    case.
A6. The preceding answers mention a few features of our statistical method-
    ology. The remainder of the paper discusses the methodology in greater
    breadth and detail.
                   PREDICTION OF BATTING AVERAGES                            9

   Section 2 of the paper discusses variance stabilization for binomial vari-
ables. This variance stabilization and normalization is a key building stone
for all our analyses. The transformation presented in this section is a vari-
ant of the standard methodology, and use of this variant is motivated by the
discussion in this section.
   Sections 3 and 4 describe further aspects of our estimation and prediction
methodology. Section 3 establishes the basic statistical structure for the
estimation and validation of the estimators. Section 4 gives definitions and
motivation for each of the estimators to be investigated.
   Sections 5 and 6 give validation results that describe how well the esti-
mators perform on the baseball data. Section 5 contains a series of results
involving estimation based on data from the first three months of the six
month season. Section 6 discusses results for estimation based on either the
first month or on the first five months of the season.
   Section 7 contains a test of the basic assumption that each batter’s monthly
performance is a binomial random variable with a (latent) value of p that is
constant throughout the season. The results of this test confirm the viability
of this assumption as a basis for the analyses of Sections 5 and 6.
   The Appendix applies this same type of goodness-of-fit test to each bat-
ter’s performance over shorter ten-day spans. The analyses of Sections 5 and
6 do not require validity of the binomial assumption over such shorter spans
of time. However, the issue is of independent interest since it is related to
whether batting performance varies over successive relatively short periods.
In this case the test procedure identifies a subset of batters whose perfor-
mance strongly suggests “streakiness” in the sense that their latent ability
differs for different ten-day segments of the season.

   2. Methodology, part I; variance stabilization. We are concerned with
records that tabulate the number of hits and number of at-bats for each of
a sample of players over a given period of time. For a given player indexed
by i, let Hi denote the number of hits and let Ni denote the number of
at-bats during the given time period of one or more months. (In Section 1
this was denoted by AB, instead of N , but a two-letter symbol is awkward
in mathematical displays to follow.) The time period in question should be
clear from the text and context of the discussion. Where it is necessary to
consider multiple time periods, such as the two halves of the season, we will
insert additional subscripts, and use symbols such as Hji or Nji to denote
the observed number of hits and at-bats for player i within period j. We
assume that each Hi is a binomial random variable with an unobserved
parameter pi corresponding to the player’s hitting ability. Thus, for data
involving P players over two halves of the season, we write
(2.1)       Hji ∼ Bin(Nji , pi ),    j = 1, 2, i = 1, . . . , Pj , indep.
10                                     L. D. BROWN

   Baseball hitting performance is commonly summarized as a proportion,
R, called the batting aveRage, for which we will use subscripts corresponding
to those of its components. (In Section 1 we used the commonsense symbol
BA for this.) Thus,
                                                Hji
                                       Rji =        .
                                                Nji
   Binomial proportions are nearly normal with mean p, but with a variance
that depends on the unknown value of p. For our purposes, it is much more
convenient to deal with nearly normal variables having a variance that de-
pends only on the observedpvalue of N . The standard variance-stabilizing
transformation, T = arcsin H/N , achieves this goal moderately well. Its
lineage includes foundational papers by Bartlett (1936, 1947) and impor-
tant extensions by Anscombe (1948), as well as Freeman and Tukey (1950)
and Mosteller and Youtz (1961), to which we will refer later. It has been
used in various statistical contexts, including its use for analyzing baseball
batting data in E&M. For purposes like the one at hand, it is preferable to
use the transformation
                                                s
                                                    H + 1/4
(2.2)                           X = arcsin                  .
                                                    N + 1/2
We will reserve the symbol, X, to represent such a variable and, where
convenient, will use subscripts corresponding to those for H and N .
  To understand the advantages of the definition (2.2), consider a somewhat
broader family of variance-stabilizing transformations,
                                       s
                      (c)                  H +c
(2.3)             Y         = arcsin              ∋ H ∼ Bin(N, p).
                                           N + 2c
Each of these transformations has the variance-stabilizing property
                                               1    1
                                                               
                                     (c)
(2.4)                        Var(Y         )=    +O    .
                                              4N    N2
Anscombe (1948) shows that the choice c = 3/8 yields the stronger prop-
erty, Var(Y (3/8) ) = (4N + 2)−1 + O(N −3 ). We will argue that this stronger
property is less valuable for our purposes than is the property in (2.6) below.
   It can be easily computed that, for each p : 0 < p < 1,
                           √             1 − 2p                  1
                                                                           
(2.5)    E(Y (c) ) = arcsin p +                    (c − 1/4) + O    .
                                                                 N2
                                            p
                                       2N p(1 − p)
Hence, the choice c = 1/4 yields
                                            √                   1
                                                                   
                        E(Y (1/4) ) = arcsin p + O                 .
                                                                N2
                    PREDICTION OF BATTING AVERAGES                               11

Consequently,
                                                   1           1
                                                       
                          2       (c)
(2.6)                 sin [E(Y          )] = p + O          ⇔c= .
                                                   N2          4
The transformation with c = 1/4 thus gives the best asymptotic control
over the bias among all the transformations of the form Y (c) . Better control
of bias is important to the adequacy of our transformation methods, and
is more important than having slightly better control over the variance,
as could be yielded by the choice c = 3/8. [The transformation proposed
by Freeman and Tukey (1950) and studied further by Mosteller and Youtz
(1961) is very similar to Y (1/2) , and so does not perform as well for our
purposes as our preferred choice Y (1/4) .]
   Results for realistic sample sizes are more pertinent in practice than are
asymptotic properties alone. Here, too, the transformation with c = 1/4 pro-
vides excellent performance both in terms of bias and variance. Figure 1
displays the un-transformed bias of three competing transformations—the
traditional one (c = 0), the mean-matching one (c = 1/4) and Anscombe’s
transformation (c = 3/8). This is defined as
(2.7)                         Bias = sin2 (Ep (Y (c) )) − p.
These plots show that the mean-matching choice (c = 1/4) nearly eliminates
the bias for N = 10 (and even smaller) so long as 0.1 < p < 0.9. The other
transformations require larger N and/or p nearer 1/2 in order to perform as
                                    √
well. [Plots of Ep (Y (c) ) − arcsin p exhibit qualitatively similar behavior to
those in Figure 1, but we felt plots of (2.7) were slightly easier to interpret.
They are also more directly relevant to some of the uses of such transfor-
mations, as, e.g., in Brown et al. (2007).] Thus, in later contexts where bias
correction is important and control of variance is only a secondary concern,
we will restrict attention to batters having more than 10 at-bats.
   Figure 2 displays the variance of Y (c) after normalizing by the nominal
(asymptotic) value. Thus, the displayed curves are for
                      (
                ∗         Varp (Y (c) )/( 14 N ),              for c = 0, 1/4,
(2.8)   Var ratio =
                          Varp (Y (3/8) )/(1/(4N + 2)),        for c = 3/8.
Note that in this respect (as well as in terms of bias) c = 1/4 and c = 3/8
perform much better than does the traditional value c = 0. Above about
N = 12 and p = 0.150 both transformations do reasonably well in terms
of variance. Nearly all baseball batters can be expected to have p ≥ 0.150,
with the possible exception of some pitchers. In Section 7 where variance
stabilization (in addition to low bias) is especially important, we will require
for inclusion in our analysis that N ≥ 12.
   It is also of some importance that the transformed variables, Y , have
approximately a normal distribution, in addition to having very nearly the
12                                  L. D. BROWN




Fig. 1. Bias as defined in (2.7) for Y (3/8) (top curve), Y (1/4) (middle curve), Y (0)
(bottom curve). Three plots show values of bias for various values of N for p = 0.100,
0.200, 0.300, respectively. The 4th plot shows bias for N = 12 for various p.


desired, nominal mean and variance. Even for N = 12 and 0.75 ≥ p ≥ 0.25
(roughly) the variables for c = 1/4 and c = 3/8 appear reasonably well ap-
proximated by their nominal normal distribution in spite of their very dis-
crete nature.

   3. Methodology, part II; estimation, prediction and validation. As dis-
cussed at (2.1), we will begin with a set of baseball batting records containing
values generically denoted as {Hi , Ni } for a sample of baseball players. These
records may be for only part of a season and may consist of records for all
the major league batters having a value of Hi above a certain threshold, or
may consist only of a sub-sample of such records.
                      PREDICTION OF BATTING AVERAGES                                  13




Fig. 2. Variance ratio* as defined in (2.8) for Y 0 (top curve), Y (1/4) (middle curve),
Y (3/8) (bottom curve). Three plots show values of the ratio for various values of N for
p = 0.100, 0.200, 0.300, respectively. The 4th plot shows ratio for N = 12 for various p.


  In accordance with the discussion in Section 2, we will then write
                                s
                                    Hi + 1/4                   √
(3.1)             Xi = arcsin                ,      θi = arcsin pi .
                                    Ni + 1/2
We will assume that each Xi is (approximately) normally distributed and
they are all independent, a situation which we summarize by writing
                                                     1
(3.2)               Xi ∼ N (θi , σi2 ), where σi2 =     .
                                                    4Ni
Much of the analysis that follows is grounded on the validity of this as-
sumption; and to save space, we will proceed on that basis without further
comment.
14                                    L. D. BROWN

  As the first concrete example, in Section 5 we will study records for each
half season, denoted by {Hji , Nji }, j = 1, 2, i = 1, . . . , Pj . We assume
(3.3)                            θji = θi ,        j = 1, 2,
does not depend on the half of the season, j. In Section 7 we investigate
empirical validity of such an assumption. Estimates for θi will be drawn
from the values {X1i , N1i : i ∈ S1 } corresponding to the original observations
{H1i , N1i : i ∈ S1 }, where Sj = {i : Hji ≥ 11}. As validation of the estimator,
we compare the estimates to the corresponding observed value of X2i . The
validation is performed only over the set of indices i ∈ S1 ∩ S2 .
   To fix the later terminology, let δ = {δi : i ∈ S1 } denote any estimator of
{θi : i ∈ S1 } based on {X1i , N1i : i ∈ S1 }. Define the Sum of Squared Prediction
Error as
                                                       (X2i − δi )2 .
                                              X
(3.4)                    SSPE [δ] =
                                            i∈S1 ∩S2

We will use the term “estimator” and “predictor” interchangeably for a
procedure δ = {δi : i ∈ S1 }, since it serves both purposes. It is desirable to
adopt estimation methods for which SSPE is small.
   The SSPE can serve directly as an estimate of the prediction error. It can
also be easily manipulated to provide an estimate of the original estimation
error. We will take the second perspective. Begin by writing the estimated
squared error from the validation process as
                                      (δi − X2i )2 +                    (X2i − θi )2
                             X                                 X
              SSPE [δ] =
                           i∈S1 ∩S2                        i∈S1 ∩S2
                                   X
                           −                2(δi − X2i )(X2i − θi ).
                                 i∈S1 ∩S2

The conditional expectation given X1 of the third summand on the right is
0. For the middle term, observe that
                                                       !
                        X
                                               2
                                                                X      1
                  E              (X2i − θi ) X1 =                          .
                      i∈S1 ∩S2                                 i∈S ∩S
                                                                      4N2i
                                                                    1   2

This yields as the natural estimate of the total squared error,
                      [ [δ] = SSPE [δ] −
                                                           X   1
                      TSE                                          .
                                                       i∈S ∩S
                                                              4N2i
                                                           1    2

                [ [δ] = SSPE [δ] − E(SSPE [θ]), where SSPE [θ] denotes
In other words, TSE
the sum of squared prediction error that would be achieved by an oracle
who knew and used the true value of θ = {θi }.
  For comparisons of various estimators in various situations, it is a little
more convenient to re-normalize this. The naı̈ve estimator δ0 (X) = X is a
                      PREDICTION OF BATTING AVERAGES                            15

standard common-sense procedure whose performance will be investigated
in all contexts. Because of this, a natural normalization is to divide by the
estimated total squared error of the naı̈ve estimator over the same set of
batters. Thus, we define the normalized estimated squared error as
                                      [
                              [ [δ] = TSE [δ] .
                                  ∗
(3.5)                         TSE
                                      [ [δ0 ]
                                      TSE
                  ∗
              [ [δ0 ] = 1.
In this way, TSE
   The estimators we adopt are primarily motivated by the normal setting
in (3.2), so it seems statistically natural to validate them in that setting,
as in (3.4)–(3.5). However, from the baseball context, it is more natural to
consider prediction of the averages {R2i : i ∈ S1 ∩ S2 }. For this purpose, given
an estimation procedure R̃, the validation criteria become

           [ R [R̃] =                                        R2i (1 − R2i )
                                    (R2i − R̃i )2 −
                           X                            X
           TSE                                                              ,
                         i∈S1 ∩S2                     i∈S ∩S
                                                                  N2i
                                                         1   2

(3.6)
                      [
           [ R [R̃] = TSE R [R̃] ,
               ∗
           TSE
                      [ R [R̃0 ]
                      TSE
where R̃0 = {R1i }.
  In Sections 5 and 6 we compare the performance of several estimators as
                            ∗            ∗
measured in terms of TSE[ [δ] and TSE[ R [δ]. See, for example, Table 2. An
additional criterion, introduced in (5.1), is also investigated in that table.
The following section contains definitions and motivations for the estimators
whose performance will be examined.

  4. Methodology, part III; description of estimators.

  Naı̈ve estimator. The simplest procedure is to use the first-half perfor-
mance in order to predict the second half performance. Symbolically, this is
the estimator
(4.1)                               δ0 (X1i ) = X1i .

   Overall mean. Another extremely simple estimator is the overall mean.
By using the overall mean this estimator ignores the first-half performance
of each individual batter. Symbolically, this estimator is
                          δ(X1i ) = X̄1 = P1−1
                                                      X
(4.2)                                                     X1i .
(For notational simplicity, we will usually use the symbol, δ, for all our
estimators, with no subscript or other identifier; but when necessary we will
differentiate among them by name or by reference to their formula number.)
16                                L. D. BROWN

   Parametric empirical Bayes (method of moments). The parametric em-
pirical Bayes model for the current context originated with Stein (1962),
followed by Lindley (1962). It is closely related to random effects models
already familiar at the time, as discussed in Brown (2007), and can also be
viewed as a specialization of the original nonparametric empirical Bayes for-
mulation of Robbins (1951, 1956) that is described later in this section. The
motivation for this estimator begins with supposition of a model in which
(4.3)                  θi ∼ N (µ, τ 2 ),     independent,
where µ, τ 2 are unknown parameters to be estimated, and are often referred
to as “hyper-parameters.” If µ, τ 2 were known, then under (4.3) the Bayes
estimator of θi would be
                                           τ2
(4.4)                  θiBayes = µ +          2 (X1i − µ),
                                       τ 2 + σ1i
        2 = 1/4N ,
where σji        ji
  Under the supposition (4.3) [and the normality assumption (3.2)], the
observed variables {X1i } are marginally distributed according to
(4.5)                        X1i ∼ N (µ, τ 2 + σ1i
                                                2
                                                   ).
The empirical Bayes concept is to use the {X1i } distributed as in (4.5) in
order to estimate µ, τ 2 , and then to substitute the estimators of µ, τ 2 into
Bayes formula, (4.4), in order to yield an estimate of {θi }.
   There are several plausible estimators for µ, τ 2 that can be used here. We
present two of these as being of significant interest. As will be seen from
Section 5, the performance of the resulting procedures differ somewhat, and
this involves technical differences in the definitions of the procedures. The
first estimator involves a Method of Moments idea based on (4.5). This
requires iteratively solving a system of two equations, given as follows:
                       X1i /(τ̃ 2 + σ1i
                                      2)
                     P
                 µ̃ = P      2      2    ,
                           1/(τ̃ + σ1i )
(4.6)
                      ( (X1i − µ̃)2 (−(P1 − 1)/P1 )           2)
                       P                                P
                  2                                          σ1i +
                 τ̃ =                                                .
                                      P1 − 1
As motivation for this estimator, note that if the positive-part sign is omit-
ted in the definition, then one has the unbiasedness conditions E(µ̃) =
µ, E(τ̃ 2 ) = τ 2 . The estimator of µ is chosen to be best-linear-unbiased. The
positive-part sign in the definition of τ̃ 2 is a commonsense improvement on
the estimator without that modification. Apart from this, the estimator of
τ̃ 2 is not the only plausible unbiased estimate, and there are further motiva-
tions for the choice in (4.6) in terms of asymptotic Bayes and admissibility
ideas, as discussed in Brown (2007).
                       PREDICTION OF BATTING AVERAGES                           17

   [In practice, with data like that in our baseball examples, one iteration of
this system yields almost the same accuracy as does convergence to a full
solution. The one step iteration involves solving for the first iteration of τ̃ 2
by simply plugging X̄1· into (4.6) in place of µ̃. Then this initial iteration
for τ̃ 2 can be substituted into the first equation of (4.6) to yield a first value
                                             P
for µ̃. When X̄1· is numerically close to ( X1i /σ1i 2 )/(P 1/σ 2 ) this one-step
                                                                 1i
procedure yields a satisfactory answer; otherwise, additional iterations may
be needed to find a better approximation to the solution of (4.6).]
   Symbolically, the parametric empirical Bayes (Method of Moments) esti-
mator [EB(MM) as an abbreviation] can be written as
                                              τ̃ 2
(4.7)                        δi = µ̃ +             2 (X1i − µ̃),
                                         τ̃ 2 + σ1i
with µ̃, τ̃ 2 as in (4.6).

   Parametric empirical Bayes (maximum likelihood). Efron and Morris (1975)
suggest the above idea, but with a modified maximum likelihood estimator
in place of (4.6). We will investigate their maximum likelihood proposal,
but, for simplicity, will implement it without the minor modification that
they suggest. In place of (4.6) use the maximum likelihood estimators, µ̂, τ̂ 2
based on the distribution (4.5). These are the solution to the system
                                               X1i /(τ̂ 2 + σ1i
                                                             2)
                                               P
                                         µ̂ = P             2) ,
                                                1/(τ̂ 2 + σ1i
(4.8)
                        X (X1i − µ̂)2          X          1
                                      2 )2 =
                             (τ̂ 2 + σ1i                      2
                                                      τ̂ 2 + σ1i
                                                                   .

Substitution in (4.4) then yields the parametric empirical Bayes (Maximum
Likelihood) estimator [EB(ML) as an abbreviation]:
                                            τ̂ 2
(4.9)                        δi = µ̂ +           2    (X1i − µ̂).
                                         τ̂ 2 + σ1i

   Nonparametric empirical Bayes. Begin with the weaker supposition than
(4.3) that
(4.10)                         θi ∼ G,         independent,
where G denotes an unknown distribution function. If G were known, then
the Bayes estimator would be given by
                                    R
                                      θi ϕ((X1i − θ)/σ1i )G(dθ)
(4.11)           (θG )i = E(θi |X) = R                          ,
                                             ϕ((X1i − θ)/σ1i )G(dθ)
where ϕ denotes the standard normal density.
18                                  L. D. BROWN

   The original empirical Bayes idea, as formulated in Robbins (1951, 1956),
is to use the observations to produce an approximation to θG , even though
G is not known. As Robbins observed, and others have noted in various
contexts, it is often more practical and effective to estimate θG indirectly,
rather than to try to use the observations directly in order to estimate G
and then substitute that estimate into (4.11). [But, we note that C. Zhang
(personal communication) has recently described for homoscedastic data a
feasible calculation of a deconvolution estimator for G that could be directly
substituted in (4.11).]
   Brown and Greenshtein (2007) propose an indirectly motivated estimator.
They begin with the formula from Brown (1971) which states that
                                             ∂gi∗
                                          2 ∂X1i
                                                  (X1 )
                      (θG (X1 ))i = X1 + σ1i   ∗        ,
                                             gi (X1 )
(4.12)
                                        where gi∗ (X1 ) = ϕ((X1i − θ)/σ1i )G(dθ).
                                                                   R

The next step is to estimate g∗ by a particular, generalized form of the
kernel estimator preliminary to substitution in (4.12). The coordinate values
of this kernel estimator depend on the values of σ1i  2 and the kernel weights

also depend          2
                on {σ1k }.
       √
   Let h > 0 denote the bandwidth constant for this kernel estimator. Then
define
                      X I{k:(1+h)σ2 −σ2 >0} (k)
         g̃i∗ (X) =        q         1i  1k
                                     2      2 ) − σ2
                            (1 + h)(σ1k ∨ σ1i
                       k                           1k
                                                 q                              !
(4.13)                × ϕ((X1i − X1k )/                       2 ∨ σ2 ) − σ2 )
                                                     (1 + h)(σ1k   1i     1k

                                                         !−1
                      X
                  ×         I{k:(1+h)σ2 −σ2 >0} (k)            .
                                       1i   1k
                       k

Finally, define the corresponding nonparametric empirical Bayes estimator
(NPEB as an abbreviation) as
                                                ∂g̃i∗
                                             2 ∂X1i
                                                      (X1 )
(4.14)                     δi (X1 ) = X1i + σ1i ∗           .
                                                g̃i (X1 )
  To further motivate this definition, note that calculation under the as-
sumption (4.10) yields that, for any fixed value of x ∈ ℜ,
                              q
                  ϕ((x − X )/ (1 + h)(σ 2 ∨ σ 2 ) − σ 2 ) 
                           1k           1k    1i      1k
               E         q
                                        2 ∨ σ2 ) − σ2
                               (1 + h)(σ1k   1i     1k
                    PREDICTION OF BATTING AVERAGES                             19

(4.15)                            q
                      Z ϕ((x − θ)/ (1 + h)(σ 2 ∨ σ 2 ))
                                            1k    1i
                    =        q                          G(dθ).
                                               2 ∨ σ2 )
                                      (1 + h)(σ1k   1i

The integrand in the preceding expression is a normal density with mean
θ and variance (1 + h)(σ1k     2 ∨ σ 2 ). The summation in (4.13) extend only
                                     1i
                 2
over values of σ1k ≤ (1 + h)σ1i   2 . Then, since h is small, for these values we

have the approximation (1 + h)(σ1k      2 ∨ σ 2 ) ≈ σ 2 , so that comparing (4.12)
                                             1i      1i
and (4.15) yields g̃i∗ ≈ gi∗ . A similar heuristic approximation is valid for the
partial derivatives that appear in (4.12) and (4.14). Hence, (4.14) appears
as a potentially useful estimate of the Bayes solution (4.12).
   In the applications below we used the value h = 0.25 for the situations
where P > 200 and h = 0.30 for the smaller subgroup having P = 81. After
taking into account the reduction in effective sample size in (4.13) as a
result of the heteroscedasticity, this choice is consistent with suggestions
in Brown and Greenshtein (2007) to use h ≈ 1/ log P. Performance of the
estimators as described in Section 5 seemed to be moderately robust with
respect to choices of h within a range of about ±0.05 of these values.

   Harmonic Bayes estimator. An alternate path beginning with the hier-
archical structure (4.3) involves placing a prior distribution or measure on
the hyper-parameter. One prior that has appealing properties in this setting
is to let µ be uniform on (−∞, ∞) and to let τ 2 be (independently) uni-
formly distributed on (0, ∞). The resulting marginal distribution on θ ∈ ℜP
involves the so-called harmonic prior. Specifically, ψ = θ − θ̄1 ∈ ℜP−1 has
density
                                   f (ψ) ∝ 1/kψkP−3 ,
as can essentially be seen in Strawderman (1971, 1973). This prior density is
discussed in Stein (1973, 1981), where it is shown that the resulting formal
Bayes estimator for ψ is minimax and admissible in the homoscedastic case.
(In our context, this case is when all Ni are equal). However, even in the
homoscedastic case, it is not true that the estimate of θ defined by the above
prior is admissible. However, it is not far from being admissible, and the
possible numerical improvement is very small. See Brown and Zhao (2007).
   The expression for the posterior can be manipulated via operations such
as change of variables and explicit integration of some interior integrals to
reach a computationally convenient form for the posterior density of µ, τ 2 .
For notational convenience, let γ = τ 2 . Then the posterior density of µ, γ
has the expression
                           "              #−1/2          X (X1j − µ)2 
                                     2
                               Y
(4.16)    f (µ, γ|X1 ) ∝       (γ + σ1j )         exp −             2 )   .
                                                             2(γ + σ1j
20                               L. D. BROWN

The (formal) harmonic Bayes estimator (HB as an abbreviation) is thus
given by
                                                                   !
                                      γ
                  δi (X1 ) = E µ +      2 (X1i − µ) X1 .
                                   γ + σ1i
Evaluation of this estimator requires numerical integration of P1 + 1 double
integrals.
   [In practice, this computation was slightly facilitated by making the change
of variables ω = σ 2 /(τ + σ 2 ), where σ 2 = min{σ1i
                                                    2 } > 0, and also by noting

that the posterior for µ is quite tightly concentrated around the value at
which its marginal density is a maximum.]

  James–Stein estimator. For the present heteroscedastic setting in which
shrinkage to a common mean is desired, the natural extension of the original
James and Stein (1961) positive-part estimator has the form (J–S)
                                                      !
                                    P1 − 3
(4.17)      δ(X1 ) = µ̂1 + 1 − P                 2            (X1 − µ̂1 ),
                                 (X1i − µ̂1 )2 /σ1i       +

where
                                    P       2
                                     X1i /σ1i
                              µ̂1 = P     2   .
                                      1/σ1i
Note that this estimator shrinks all coordinates of X1 by a common multiple
(toward µ̂1 ), in contrast to the preceding Bayes and empirical Bayes esti-
mators. Brown and Zhao (2006) suggests modifying this estimator slightly,
either by increasing the constant to P1 − 2 or by adding an extra (small)
shrinkage term; but the numerical difference in the current context is nearly
negligible, so we will use the traditional form, above.

   Remark (Minimaxity). The original positive-part estimator proposed
in James and Stein (1961) is
                                       P1 − 2
                                                         
                 δorig (X1 ) = 1 − P                2              X1 .
                                    (X1i − µ̂1 )2 /σ1i         +

The estimator (4.17) is a natural modification of this that provides shrinkage
toward the vector whose coordinates are all equal, rather than toward the
origin. Such a modification was suggested in Lindley (1962) and amplified in
Stein (1962), page 295, for the homoscedastic case, which corresponds here
to the case in which all values of N1i are equal. The formula (4.17) involves
the natural extension of that reasoning.
   Stein’s estimator was proved in James and Stein (1961) to be minimax in
the homoscedastic case. [A more modern proof of this can be found in Stein
                    PREDICTION OF BATTING AVERAGES                              21

(1962, 1973) and in many recent textbooks, such as Lehmann and Casella
(1998).] It was also proved minimax for the heteroscedastic case under a
modified loss function that is directly related to the weighted prediction
criterion defined in (5.1) below. It is not necessarily minimax with respect
to un-weighted quadratic loss or to a prediction criterion such as (3.4) or
(3.5). However, in the situations at hand, it can be shown that the arrays of
values of {N1i } are such that minimaxity does hold. To establish this, reason
from Brown (1975), Theorem 3, or from more contemporary statements in
Berger (1985), Theorem 5.20, or Lehmann and Casella (1998), Theorem 5.7.
   However, even though it is minimax, the J–S estimator need not provide
the most desirable predictor in situations like the present one. This is es-
pecially so if the values of N1i are not stochastically related to the batting
averages, H1i /N1i (or if some relation exists, but it is not a strong one). It is
suggested in Brown (2007) that in such a case it may be more desirable to use
a procedure based on a spherically symmetric prior, such as the harmonic
Bayes estimator described above, or to use an empirical Bayes procedure
based on a symmetric assumption, such as (4.3). The current study does
not attempt to settle the theoretical issue of which forms of estimator are
generally more desirable in settings like the present one. But, we shall see
that for the data under consideration some of these estimators do indeed
perform better than the J–S estimator.

  5. Prediction based on the first half season.
                              ∗
                         [ . As described at (3.3), we divide the season
   5.1. All players, via TSE
into two parts, consisting of the first three months and the remainder of
the season. We consider only batters having N1i ≥ 11, and use the results
for these batters in order to predict the batting performance of all of these
batters that also have N2i ≥ 11. The first data column of Table 2 gives the
                ∗
           [ , as defined in (3.5), for the various predictors discussed in
values of TSE
the previous section. The remaining columns of the table will be discussed
in Section 5.2.
                                                                            ∗
                                                            [ :
  Remarks. Here are some remarks concerning the entries for TSE
    1. The worst performing predictor in this column is the naı̈ve predictor.
This predictor directly uses each X1i to predict the corresponding X2i .
  On the other extreme, prediction to the overall mean ignores the individ-
ual first-half performance of the batters (other than to compute the overall
mean). Even so, it performs better than the naı̈ve predictor! (Overall means
do not change much from season to season. It would also considerably out-
perform the naı̈ve estimator if one were to ignore first half behavior entirely,
and just predict all batters to perform according to the average of the first
half of the preceding season.)
22                                    L. D. BROWN

                                          Table 2         ∗     ∗        ∗
                                                      [ , TSE
Values for half-season predictions for all batters of TSE   [ R and TWSE
                                                                     \ [as defined
                      in (5.1), below, and the discussion afterward]
                                         ∗                     ∗                              ∗
                                   [
                      All batters; TSE                     [R
                                              All batters; TSE                     \
                                                                     All batters; TWSE

P for estimation              567                     567                        567
P for validation              499                     499                        499
Naive                          1                       1                           1
Group’s mean                 0.852                   0.887                  1.120 (0.7411 )
EB(MM)                       0.593                   0.606                      0.626
EB(ML)                       0.902                   0.925                      0.607
NP EB                        0.508                   0.509                      0.560
Harmonic prior               0.884                   0.905                      0.600
James–Stein                  0.525                   0.540                      0.502



    2. The best performing predictors in order are those corresponding to the
nonparametric empirical Bayes method, the James–Stein method, and the
parametric EB(MM) method. The performance of the parametric EB(ML)
method and the true (formal) Bayes harmonic prior method is mediocre.
They perform about equally poorly; indeed, the two estimators are numeri-
cally very similar, which is not surprising if one looks closely at the motiva-
tion for each.
   3a. There are two explanations for the relatively poor performance of the
EB(ML) and the HB estimators. First, Figure 3 contains the histogram for
the values of {X1i }. Note that this histogram is not well matched to a normal
distribution. In fact, as suggested by the results in Table 1, it appears to be
better modeled as a mixture of two distinct normal distributions. But the
motivation for these two estimators involves the presumption in (4.3) that
the true distribution of {θi } is normal, and this would entail that the {X1i }




                   Fig. 3.   Histogram and box-plot for {X1i : N1i ≥ 11}.
                      PREDICTION OF BATTING AVERAGES                                 23

are also normally distributed. Hence, the situation in practice does not com-
pletely match well to the motivation supporting these estimators. However,
this nonmatch is also true concerning the motivation for the EB(MM) and
J–S estimators. Only the nonparametric EB estimator is designed to work
well in situations where the {θi } are noticeably nonnormal. This provides
the justification for the fact that the NPEB estimator performs best. The
difference in performance between the EB(ML) or the HB estimator and the
EB(MM) or J–S estimators apparently rests on a second respect in which
the actual data is not well matched to the motivation for the estimators.
   3b. The second source of deviation from assumptions is that the sample
values of {N1i } and {X1i }are moderately correlated. There is considerable
correlation due to the fact that the pitchers generally have many fewer at-
bats and much lower batting averages. (Their mean values for N1 and X1
are X̄1 = 0.396, N̄1 = 25.1, whereas for the nonpitchers the values are X̄1 =
0.528, N̄1 = 157.8.) Furthermore, even among the group consisting only of
nonpitchers, there is also correlation. This correlation is evident from the
following plot of N1i versus X1i for nonpitchers in S1 . [Frey (2007) observed
a qualitatively similar plot for the entire 2004 season.]
   Although correlations as described above violate the basic assumptions
motivating all of the empirical Bayes and the Bayes estimator, they seem
to have a greater effect on the EB(ML) and the HB estimator than on
the other three estimators under discussion. This effect manifests itself in
terms of both the estimated mean and the estimate of τ 2 which controls the
shrinkage factor appearing in (4.4).
   In the present situation, the more important effect is that on the esti-
mate of τ 2 . Higher performing batters tend to have much higher numbers
of at-bats. The EB(ML) estimator essentially computes a weighted estimate
of τ 2 with weights proportional to the values of Ni . It thus gives most




Fig. 4. Scatterplot of X1 vs N1 for nonpitchers. For this plot, R2 = 0.18. (Overall, for
all batters in S1 , the value is R2 = 0.247.)
24                                   L. D. BROWN

weight to those higher average batters, whose averages are clustered closer
together. The other EB estimators, such as EB(MM), essentially use an un-
weighted estimate of τ 2 , which results in a larger value for the estimate.
A smaller estimate for τ 2 results in an estimator which shrinks more. This
results in performance that more closely resembles that of the overall mean,
which is inferior to the more suitably calibrated shrinkage estimators, such
as EB(MM) or NPEB.
   Figure 5 shows several of the estimators. Note that the EB(ML) estimator
shrinks almost completely to µ̂. (The HB estimator, not shown, is very simi-
lar.) The J–S estimator is a linear function, and has a relatively steep slope.
The NPEB estimator involves “shrinkage” in varying amounts (depending
on the respective Ni ) and toward somewhat different values depending on
Xi . (Thus, some may feel that “shrinkage” is not a strictly correct term to
describe its behavior.) Overall, there is considerable similarity between the
NPEB and J–S estimators, and this is consistent with the fact that their
overall performance is similar.
   3c. In summary, the correlation between {N1i } and {X1i } is an impor-
tant feature of the data. Such a correlation violates the statistical model
that justifies our empirical Bayes and Bayes estimators. The results in Ta-
ble 2 show for our data that, relative to the other estimators, the EB(MM)
estimator and the HB estimator are not robust with respect to this type
of deviation from the ideal assumptions. Further calculations (not reported
here) also lead to the same conclusion in other, more general settings, that
these estimators are not robust with respect to this type of deviation from
assumptions, and should thus not be used if such deviations are suspected.




Fig. 5. Values of estimates as a function of X1 for the full data set. × = NPEB,  = J–S,
♦ = EB(ML), + = EB(MM). The lower horizontal line is X̄1 = 0.509, the upper one is
µ̂ = 0.542 of (4.8).
                    PREDICTION OF BATTING AVERAGES                         25

  5.2. All players, other criteria.
           ∗         ∗
       [ R . TSE
  via TSE       [ R as defined in (3.6) involves estimation of means for
batting averages, rather than for values of X. The second data column of
                                    ∗
                               [ R for all players.
Table 3 contains the values of TSE
  For the naı̈ve prediction here, we used just the first half batting average.
The group mean used for the prediction here was the group mean of the first
half averages. The other predictions used in the calculations for this column
were derived by inverting the expression in the second part of (3.1); that is,
                                 R̃i = sin2 θ̂i ,
                                                                ∗
                                                    [ in the first column
where the values of θ̂i were those used to derive TSE
                                                                       ∗
                                                                  [ . This
of the table. Note that the results are very similar to those for TSE
is a demonstration of the fact that prediction and validation can equally be
carried out in terms of the X-values or in terms of actual batting averages.
Because of this similarity, in the remainder of the paper we give only results
for X-values since these are directly related to the motivation of the various
estimators discussed in Section 4.

   All players, via a weighted squared-error criterion. The prediction cri-
teria described in Section 3 and studied above involve equal weights for all
players. This type of criteria is suitable for some practical purposes, and
is also a special focus for our study of the general performance of various
estimators. For other practical purposes, it may be desirable to weight the
performance of the predictors according to the number of at-bats of each
player. This reflects a desire to concentrate on accuracy in predicting the
performance of those batters who have the most at-bats. The most appro-
priate practical form of this criterion might be the one that weights squared
prediction error according to the number of each player’s second half at-bats.
However, this number is unknown at the time of prediction, and so this cri-
terion would involve an additional random quantity. For this reason, we
prefer to study a prediction-loss that uses weights derived from the player’s
number of first half at-bats. Accordingly, the criterion used in Table 2 is

                \ [δ] =                                           N1i
                                     N1i (X2i − δi )2 −
                            X                              X
               TWSE                                                   ,
                          i∈S1 ∩S2                        i∈S ∩S
                                                                 4N2i
                                                            1       2
(5.1)
                         \
                \ [δ] = TWSE [δ] .
                    ∗
               TWSE
                         \ [δ0 ]
                        TWSE
  There are two table entries corresponding to the mean in this column.
The first entry corresponds to the use of the ordinary sample mean as the
26                               L. D. BROWN

predictor. The second entry, marked with the superscript 1 corresponds to
the use of the weighted mean. The weighted mean is the generalized least
square estimator relative to weighted squared error, so it is natural that
                     ∗
                \ should be considerably smaller than when using the
its value of TWSE
unweighted mean. Its value is also considerably less than that for the naı̈ve
estimator.
   The relative performance of the several estimators is somewhat different
                                       ∗          ∗
                                  [ and TSE
under this criterion than under TSE          [ R . It is still the case that the
naı̈ve estimator performs poorly, and most of the other estimators are better.
However, it is now the case that the J–S estimator performs the best. All
the other estimators have rather similar performance under this criterion,
with NPEB being slightly better than the others.
   Remark 3, above, suggests that the correlation of {N1i } and {X1i } is re-
lated to the previously observed weaker performance of EB(ML) and the
                                                 ∗
harmonic Bayes estimator. The use of TWSE  \ mitigates the effect of this
correlation, since in the situation at hand it stresses accuracy of the predic-
tion errors for the higher performing batters because these batters generally
also have larger values of N1i . It is also worth noting that the motivation
for the James–Stein estimator involves exactly the sort of weighted squared
error that appears in (5.1). Hence, it was to be anticipated that the J–S esti-
mator would generally outperform the other estimators with respect to this
criterion. [It is much more surprising to us that it also dominates EB(ML)
                               ∗             ∗
and HB with respect to TSE [ and TWSE  \ R .]

   5.3. Results for the two subgroups (nonpitchers and pitchers). Remark
3b stresses that some of the performance characteristics of the estimators
may be due to the correlation between the {N1i } and {X1i }. This correlation
is weaker or absent within the two subgroups of nonpitchers and of pitchers.
If one looks only at the nonpitchers, then this correlation is somewhat weaker
(R2 = 0.19 vs R2 = 0.25), and the sample distribution of {X1i } is somewhat
closer to being normal. For the pitchers, the correlation is virtually zero
(R2 = 0.0001), and the sample distribution of {X1i } is close to normal. We
might therefore expect some of the procedures —especially EB(ML) and
the harmonic prior to have improved relative performance when used within
these subgroups.
   Table 3 contains values of the prediction criteria for predictors constructed
separately from the first-half records of the nonpitchers and of the pitchers.
There is considerable regularity in the relative performance of the estimators
as compared with each other and only a few differences as compared with
the pattern of results in Table 2.
   For both subgroups it is still true that the naı̈ve estimator has the worst
performance, and here the overall mean is much better. Indeed, here it is not
                      PREDICTION OF BATTING AVERAGES                                 27




Fig. 6. Values of estimates as a function of Xi for the nonpitchers data set. × = NPEB,
 = J–S, ♦ = EB(ML). The horizontal line shows both X̄1 = 0.544 and µ̂ = 0.546 of (4.8).


only much better, but with respect to TSE \∗ none of the other estimators
have significantly better performance, although only J–S is noticeably worse.
   For the subsample of nonpitchers, Figure 6 shows the estimators resulting
from three of the procedures. We do not show the EB(MM) or HB estima-
tors since these are quite similar to EB(ML) here, and all involve shrinkage
almost to the sample mean. In fact, among the alternative estimators pro-
posed in Section 4, all are comparable to the sample mean except for the
James–Stein estimator, which has much worse performance. Figure 5 shows
that the J–S estimator has very much less shrinkage than the other esti-
mators, and is much more similar to the naı̈ve estimator taking the values
{X1i }.
   The relatively poor performance of the nonparametric EB estimator wrt
\
TSE ∗ for the subgroup of pitchers is perhaps related to the relatively small
sample size. That estimator is constructed to perform well for moderate to
large sample sizes, and perhaps the sample size here (P1 = 81) is somewhat
marginal to get good performance for this estimator because of the presence
of noticeable heteroscedasticity. (The sample values of N1i have a four-fold
range, from 11 to 44.) Furthermore, the other (empirical) Bayes estimators
are particularly constructed to perform well for situations where the values
of {θi } are normally distributed, which appears to be very nearly the case
here.
   We found it somewhat surprising that the J–S estimator did not perform
comparatively better for the subgroup of pitchers. Especially in the case of
        ∗
 \ , all the motivating assumptions for the J–S estimator appear to
TWSE
hold quite closely, so one could expect it to perform very well. However, the
28                                    L. D. BROWN

estimators that outperform J–S (the parametric EB estimators and the HB
estimator) are especially constructed to work well in the situation where the
true values of {θi } are normally distributed, and that appears to be the case
                                                   ∗
here. Even for weighted squared error (TWSE \ ), these estimators retain
their edge over J–S, which is especially designed for weighted squared error.
   The weighting is not particularly relevant to the performance of these
better performing estimators. This is because the weights (which derive from
the {Ni }) are not particularly correlated with the values of the {θi }.

   Simulations. We performed some simulations to investigate the breadth
of generality of the numerical results observed in Table 3. The focus of
the present article is on the empirical results, rather than results of such
simulations. Hence, we report only briefly on the nature of these simulation
results insofar as they suggest the variability that one might expect from
entries such as those in the tables.
   We simulated results from the model (3.2)–(3.3) with arrays of values of
{N1i , N2i } taken from the actual data in the simulation, and used param-
eter values as suggested from the baseball data. In a second simulation we
attempted to simulate from an ad-hoc model consistent with the type of
correlation between the {N1i } and {X1i } as seen in Figure 4.
   Overall, the actual results in Table 3 (as well as those in Table 2) are very
consistent with the results from the simulations. In the simulations there
is considerable variability of the magnitudes of the nonnormalized values of
                                                                          ∗
[ . But there is much more stability in the normalized values, TSE
TSE                                                                  [ , and
in the relation between the entries in pairs of cells in the same column.

                                           Table 3                              ∗
                                                                            [ and of
     Values for half-season predictions for nonpitchers and for pitchers of TSE
                                             ∗
                                      \ [as defined in (5.1)]
                            weighted TWSE

                       Nonpitchers;      Nonpitchers;       Pitchers;        Pitchers;
                              ∗                  ∗                ∗                 ∗
                          [
                         TSE               \
                                          TWSE               [
                                                             TSE              \
                                                                             TWSE

P for estimation           486               486               81               81
P for validation           435               435               64               64
Naive                       1                 1                1              0.982
Group’s mean              0.378         0.607 (0.5611 )      0.127        0.262 (0.2621 )
EB(MM)                    0.387             0.494            0.129            0.191
EB(ML)                    0.398             0.477            0.117            0.180
NPEB                      0.372             0.527            0.212            0.266
Harmonic prior            0.391             0.473            0.128            0.190
James–Stein               0.359             0.469            0.164            0.226

(Superscript1 : The numbers with superscript1 are values relative to the weighted mean.)
                     PREDICTION OF BATTING AVERAGES                               29

   For example, the pairwise differences from the simulation between the
last six entries in the first column of the table had standard deviations in
the simulation ranging from about 0.05 to 0.20. As a particular result, in
the simulation from the model (3.2)–(3.3) (and with τ 2 = 0.0011, which is
consistent with the value seen in the baseball data) the difference between
     ∗
[ for the mean and for the J–S estimator had a mean value of 0.10 with
TSE
a standard deviation of 0.09. This mean difference is of course considerably
larger than that observed in the data, where the difference is only 0.019.
But the observed difference is well within the range of values suggested by
the simulation. Furthermore, the real-life situation has a correlation between
                                                                   ∗
the {N1i } and {X1i } which seems to affect the values of TSE  [ in Table 3,
although only by additional amounts of a magnitude less than that of the
already noted standard deviation. [As already remarked, the correlation has
a greater effect on the behavior of EB(ML) and HB in Table 1.]
   While not of great magnitude, these standard deviations are nevertheless
large enough to cast doubt on whether the relations among the entries in the
last six rows of the table would be stable across different baseball seasons.
   The standard deviations for the analysis of pitchers were naturally notice-
ably larger. This is because the sample size there is only 81 as contrasted
to 486 for the nonpitchers. It is also because the pitchers had more appar-
ent variability in their values of {θi }, and this was built into the parameter
values used for the simulation.
   The one conclusion that remains as being absolutely confirmed by the
simulations is the inferiority of the naı̈ve estimator relative to all the other
estimators.

   6. Predictions based on other portions of the season. The previous dis-
cussion involved producing estimates based on data from the first three
months of the season. These estimates were then validated against the per-
formance for the remainder of the season. It is possible to split the season
in different fashions. For example, one can (try to) use data from the first
month, and validate it against the performance for the remaining five months
of the season. Or one could base predictions on the first five months on the
season, and validate against performance in the last month. We discuss two
such analyses below. In constructing such an analysis some care may need
to be taken to guarantee similarity of the nature of batters in the estimation
set and the validation set.

   Predictions based on one month of data. In this situation the estimation
set for all batters, S1 , contains relatively few pitchers, but that is also true for
the validation set S1 ∩ S2 . Hence, it is appropriate to conduct the validation
study using all batters. Table 4 gives the results from this validation study.
30                               L. D. BROWN

   The results reported in Table 4 are entirely consistent with earlier results
                                                                       ∗
and the previous discussion. By comparison with Table 2, the TSE  [ value
here for the naı̈ve estimator is very much larger than that for all the other
estimators. This is because the naı̈ve predictions based on only one-month’s
data are much less accurate than those based on three-month’s data. On
the other hand, the mean value for one month is not very different from
that for three months. Hence, the mean has similar estimation accuracy in
the setting of both Tables 2 and 4. In addition, as in Table 2, the value
for EB(MM) is comparable to that for the overall mean, and the value for
NPEB is noticeably better.

   Predictions based on five months of data. If we use the first five months
of the season as the portion on which to base predictions, then the validation
set consists of the remainder of the season which is only slightly more than
one month long. This results in an estimation sample that contains a hefty
proportion of the low performing pitchers (102 pitchers and 532 nonpitchers).
But the corresponding validation set contains relatively fewer pitchers (39
pitchers and 409 nonpitchers). For suitability of the type of validation study
we are conducting, the validation set should resemble the estimation set in
its important basic characteristics. Hence it is not useful to look at results
here for all batters.
   For this reason, we report only the results of an analysis based on non-
pitchers with a five-month estimation set and a one-plus month validation
set. Even here there is a problem concerning the structural similarity of
the estimation and validation sets. Since the estimation set involves a much
longer horizon, it contains a much larger proportion of rarely used (and low
performing) batters. In order to attain better similarity in estimation and
validation sets, we will require that the batters in the 5-month estimation
set have values of N1i > 25 to guarantee that they are not hitters who are
extremely rarely used, and hence, unlikely to have at least 11 at-bats in the
last month of the season.
   With this type of estimation and validation situation, the values of {X1i }
should be fairly good predictors of the corresponding {X2i }, as suggested
by considerations in the discussion following Table 6. But it is also true that
the validation values of {X2i } are relatively close to each other so that the

                           ∗
                                      Table 4
                       [ for five estimators for prediction based on
             Values of TSE
                           the first month for all batters

             Naive      Mean        EB(MM)         NPEB         J–S

             1          0.250        0.240         0.169       0.218
                               PREDICTION OF BATTING AVERAGES                                           31

mean X̄1 is also a good predictor of the {X2i }. The results in Table 5 are
consistent with this. They are also consistent (if only marginally) with the
discussion following (6.2), below, which suggests we should anticipate that
         ∗
    [ [mean] for this type of study.
1 > TSE

   Naı̈ve estimator vs group mean. The fact that in our settings the overall
group mean performs better than using the individual batting performances
as predictors can be explained and amplified by a few simple calculations.
The following table contains numerical sample quantities needed for these
calculations.
   In Table 6 the sums and sum of squared error (SSE) extend over S1 ∩ S2
within the subgroup of the relevant row. Under the model (3.2)–(3.3),
                                                                   1    1
                                 Var(X2i − X1i ) =                    +     .
                                                                  4N2i 4N1i
Hence, the third data column of the table is the expectation of SSPE-naı̈ve.
Also,
                                         !
                     (X2i − X̄1 )2 = E(SSE S1 ∩S2 (X2 )) + E(X̄1 − ES1 ∩S2 (X2 )2 ).
              X
(6.1) E
          S1 ∩S2

The second term on the right of (6.1) is numerically negligible. Hence, we
have as a reasonably accurate approximation,
                                                              !
                                                          2
                                 X
                          E              (X2i − X̄1 )             ≈ SSE S1 ∩S2 (X2 ).
                                S1 ∩S2


                                   ∗
                                           Table 5
                               [ for five estimators based on the first 5
                     Values of TSE
                       months, for nonpitchers (as described in the text)

                Naive             Mean             EB(MM)                NPEB           J–S

                1                 0.955                 0.904             0.944         0.808


                                            Table 6
              Statistics to evaluate ideal behavior of SSPE as defined in (3.4)
              P                          P
                    S 1 ∩S 2
                               1/4N1i        S 1 ∩S 2
                                                        1/4N2i Sum of prev. entries SSES 1 ∩S 2 (X2 )
                                                                = E(SSPE-naı̈ve) ≈ E(SSPE to mean)

All batters             1.800                    1.766                     3.566                3.255
Nonpitchers             1.154                    1.189                     2.343                1.569
Pitchers                0.646                    0.577                     1.223                0.672
32                               L. D. BROWN

These are the entries in the last column of Table 6. These entries are all
smaller than those in the preceding column. This shows that one should
expect the data in Tables 2 and 3 to have SSPE[naı̈ve] < SSPE[mean], which
is equivalent to
(6.2)                          1 > SSPE[naı̈ve].
  We can also use this information to give some idea how much initial season
data would be needed so that SSPE[naı̈ve] ≈ SSPE[mean]. Multiplying the
values of N1i by a constant factor, c, will multiply the values in the first
data column of Table 4 by 1/c. Hence, in order to have SSPE[naı̈ve] ≈
SSPE[mean] over the full season, we need
                                  1.800
                          c≈                = 1.2.
                              3.255 − 1.766
In other words, an initial period of about 1.2 × 3 = 3.6 months should be
enough to have SSPE[naı̈ve] ≈ SSPE[mean] for the set of all players. (Ac-
tually, somewhat more than 3.6 months would probably be needed because
adding additional time would bring some additional batters having small
values of N into the data under evaluation.)
   For the subgroups, much more additional data would be needed, since
these subgroups are much more homogeneous than the combined set of all
players. The corresponding values of c are as follows:
                                               1.154
                for the nonpitchers c ≈                  = 3.0
                                           1.569 − 1.189
and
                                             0.646
                  for the pitchers c ≈                 = 6.8.
                                         0.672 − 0.577
Hence, one would need about 3/2 seasons of initial data before a nonpitcher’s
initial batting average would overall be a better predictor of future perfor-
mance than would the general mean value for all nonpitchers. For pitchers,
one would need 3.4 = 6.8/2 seasons for this same situation; so more than
three years of data would be needed, and it would be necessary to assume
that the pitcher’s (latent) batting ability was stationary over this consider-
able time span.

   7. Validation of the independent binomial assumption. The distribu-
tional assumption (2.1) states that each player’s averages for subsequent
seasonal periods can be modeled as independent binomial variables. Further,
the mean-parameter, p, depends only on the player and does not change over
successive periods of the season. Under discussion here are seasonal periods
such as half-seasons, or somewhat shorter periods, such as successive one-
month periods.
                    PREDICTION OF BATTING AVERAGES                            33

   This assumption could be violated in several ways. The most prominent
way would be if the player’s latent batting ability (p) shifts systematically
from period to period, as, for example, might happen with a batter whose
abilities improve as the season progresses. For monthly periods it could also
occur with a batter whose abilities are highest in the middle of the season
and lower at the beginning and end.
   A second mechanism that could lead to noticeable violation of these as-
sumptions would be the existence of an intrinsically “streaky” batter. Such
a batter is one whose true (but unknown) value of p is higher for some sub-
stantial intervals of time within the basic period, and lower for a subsequent
stretch of time. If these streaks are of a substantial length of time (say, one
to two weeks) but still much less than that of the basic period under consid-
eration (say, a month), then it could be that the player’s mean latent ability
during each period is (approximately) constant. However, such streakiness
could result in violation of the binomial distribution assumption. The usual
direction of such a violation would be in the statistically familiar direction of
“over-dispersion.” In this case the averages for each period could have con-
stant mean values, but could have a variance that is larger than that given
from the binomial distribution assumption. The issue of streakiness has been
frequently discussed. See, for example, Albright (1993) in the baseball con-
text or Gilovich, Vallone and Tversky (1985) for a discussion involving the
sport of basketball.
   Section 2 discusses the fact that under the assumption (2.1) the variables
                                        s
                                            Hji + 1/4
                            Xji = sin
                                            Nji + 1/2
can be accurately treated as independent random variables having the dis-
tribution
                                     √
                         Xji ∼ N (sin pi , 1/4Nji ),

so long as Nji ≥ 12. This enables construction of a test for the null hypoth-
esis (2.1) that has some sensitivity to detect nonconstant values of pi as a
function of period, j, or deviations such as over-dispersion from the bino-
mial distribution shape described in (2.1). Tests of this nature for a Poisson
distribution have been discussed in Brown and Zhao (2002).

  Testing two halves of the season. For the case where there are only two
periods, j = 1, 2, one may look at the values of
                                   X1i − X2i
(7.1)                      Zi = p                .
                                 1/4N1i + 1/4N2i
34                                       L. D. BROWN

Under the null hypothesis, these values should be (very nearly) independent
standard normal variables. One may use a normal quantile plot to graphi-
cally investigate whether this is the case, and any of several standard tests
of normality (with mean 0 and variance 1) to provide P -values. Figure 7
shows the result of applying this test with the two periods being the first
half and the second half of the season. The test was applied only for records
for which Nji ≥ 12, j = 1, 2. There were 496 such records.
   Figure 7 indicates that the values of {Zi } come close to attaining the
desired standard normal distribution. There are no large outliers present,
which suggests that there were no large scale shifts in individual ability be-
tween the two half seasons. Some deviation from normality is nevertheless
evident, and this may be evidence of statistically significant, albeit small,
deviation from the ideal binomial model. The P -value for the test of normal-
ity using the conventional Kolmogorov–Smirnov test is P = 0.046, only very
slightly below the conventional value for identifying situations of possible
interest.

   FDR procedure. One may also apply an FDR procedure to this data.
See Benjamini and Hochberg (1995) (B&H) and also Efron (2003). Let us
follow B&H and let q ∗ denote the False Discovery Rate, where a “discovery”
corresponds to a statement that a certain batter’s records appear not to
be binomially distributed with constant pi . Suppose {Pi : i = 1, . . . , m} is a
collection of P -values corresponding to m independent tests of hypotheses.
Let {P(i) } denote the ordered values from smallest to largest, and let {H(i) }
denote the corresponding null hypotheses. Let
                                                     i
                                                                
                          k = k (q ) = max i : P(i) ≤ q ∗ .
                           ∗     ∗   ∗
                                                     m




     Fig. 7.   Normal quantile plot (mean 0 variance 1) for the values of {Zi } in (7.1).
                       PREDICTION OF BATTING AVERAGES                                   35

The procedure in B&H declares a “discovery” of the alternative hypothesis
corresponding to H(i) for every i ≤ k∗ . Under this procedure, the expected
proportion of false discoveries in the sense of B&H is at most q ∗ .
    When the B&H procedure is used on the half-yearly data there will be
no discoveries noted in this data when q ∗ is set at the conventional level of
q ∗ = 0.05. Indeed, there will be no discoveries noted until q ∗ reaches nearly
0.5. At that value there will be 4 discoveries corresponding to the 4 largest
values of |Zi |—but, of course, by definition of the FDR procedure, one will
then expect half of these discoveries to be false discoveries. As before, the
overall conclusion here is that there is very little—if any—indication in the
data that the assumption (2.1) is invalid for any individual batter.

   Testing with month-long periods. It is also possible to use the same basic
idea with more than two periods. A natural division for the data at hand
is to construct a test based on 6 periods corresponding to the months of
the season (with the last period including records from both September and
October). To formally express the procedure, let the subscript j = 1, . . . , 6
index the 6 months of data and let
                             mi = #{j = 1, . . . , 6 : Nji ≥ 12}.
Then define
                                                                    j∋Nji ≥12 Nji Xji
                                                                    P
         Zi2 =                                2
                   X
(7.2)                        4Nji (Xji − X̂·i )      where X̂·i =                       .
                                                                        j∋Nji ≥12 Nji
                                                                    P
                 j∋Nji ≥12

Under the assumptions (3.2)–(3.3) which follows from (2.1), it will be the
case that the random variables Zi2 are independent χ2mi −1 variables. Only
indices i for which mi ≥ 2 are of interest here, and so we will assume, wlog,
that the batters of interest are indexed with indices i = 1, . . . , P. Here the
effective sample size is P = 514. (Only 36 of these 514 are pitchers, and their
exclusion from the following analyses would have only very minor effects on
the conclusions.)
   There are several possible ways to collectively test the resulting null hy-
pothesis that Zi2 ∼ χ2mi −1 , i = 1, . . . , P. The method we adopt here is to begin
by defining
                                           χ  2
                                     Ui = Fm i −1
                                                  (Xi ),
          2
where F χ denotes the chi-squared CDF with the indicated degrees of free-
dom. Under the null hypothesis, the {Ui } will be uniformly distributed.
   In order to better display the data graphically, we will instead look at the
values of Φ−1 (Ui ). Under the null hypothesis, these values will be normally
distributed. Figure 8 shows a normal quantile plot of the {Φ−1 (Ui )}. Under
36                                       L. D. BROWN

the null hypothesis, this plot will demonstrate the ideal normal distribu-
tion pattern (nearly a 45◦ straight line). Under alternatives corresponding
to streaks of lengths approximating a month or longer, the {Ui } will be
stochastically larger. In the case of streaks of shorter length, it could also
be possible for the {Ui } to be stochastically smaller. However, there is ab-
solutely no evidence in the monthly data that such a phenomenon occurs
with a strength or/and regularity to be visible in the analysis. Hence, we
will concentrate in the following discussion on a one-sided test that rejects
for large values of Φ−1 (Ui ). (These, of course, correspond exactly to large
values of Ui .) The test is thus attempting to detect streaks of the order of
length nearly a month, or longer.
   The (one-sided) P -value for this fit satisfies P ≥ 0.2 for several plausible
test statistics we calculated, such as the one-sided version of the Kolmogorov–
Smirnov test. However, for a family-wise error-rate multiple comparison test
of the null hypothesis that each Φ−1 (Ui ) is standard normal (versus a one
sided alternative), the family-wise P -value is P ∗ = 0.055, which is nearly
significant at the conventional level of 0.05. More precisely,
                                         514
            ∗                    −1
          P = 1 − max Φ               (Ui )      = 1 − 0.99988922514 = 0.055.
                          i

Thus, this largest observation can be declared as a “discovery” at any FDR
rate q ∗ > 0.055. There are no other FDR discoveries in the data until q ∗ gets
much larger. Even at q ∗ = 0.5, there are only two discoveries, corresponding
to the two right-most points in Figure 8.
   Out of curiosity, and to see some performance patterns that can qualify as
a possibly streaky hitter (at the level of month-long streaks) in the presence




                Fig. 8.       Normal (0, 1) quantile plot for {Φ−1 (Ui )}.
                      PREDICTION OF BATTING AVERAGES                                 37

                                       Table 7
            Monthly records of the two hitters with largest value of Φ−1 (U )

Batter          Month 4       M. 5      M. 6       M. 7       M. 8     M. 9–10   Season

Izturis   AB     102        117        86         69          70          –      444
          H       34         41         9         17          13          –      114
          pct      0.333      0.350     0.105      0.246       0.186      –        0.257
Crede     AB      79         84        80         69          58       62        432
          H       24         13        22         21           6       23        109
          pct      0.304      0.155     0.275      0.304       0.103    0.371      0.252



of the random binomial noise implied by the model, we list the monthly
records of these two players in Table 7, with the most significant batter
listed first.

  APPENDIX: SOME HITTERS DO EXHIBIT STREAKINESS OVER
                 A SHORTER TIME SPAN
   Sections 5 and 6 study the estimation of individual batting averages.
As a partial validation of the estimation procedures under consideration,
Section 7 constructs a test of streakiness in batting average at the level of
half-year-long streaks or month-long streaks. Periods of a month or longer
are the lengths of time relevant for the estimation procedures studied there.
In brief, Section 7 of the paper finds no convincing evidence of any hitting
streaks, or streakiness, at this level of granularity.
   The same technique for investigating streakiness can be employed to ex-
amine whether there are streaks of shorter duration. The present postscript
explores this issue, and finds convincing evidence of the existence of batting
streaks lasting on the order of length of ten days (or longer).

   Construction of the test. As before, the 2005 season is divided into seg-
ments. Here the segments will be 10 calendar days long except for the three
days of the “All-Star Break,” when no regular season games are played.
The segment involving that break has ten days of scheduled regular games,
running from July 2, 2005, through July 14, 2005.
   As in the main article, let Nji , j = 1, . . . , 18, i = 1, . . . , denote the number
of qualifying at-bats of player i in period j. Let Hji denote the corresponding
number of hits and
                                            s
                                                Hji + 1/4
                             Xji = arcsin                 ,
                                                Nji + 1/2
as in (2.2). In order to eliminate pitchers and other batters who play only
occasionally, we include in the analysis only players with a total of at least
38                                           L. D. BROWN

100 at bats in the season. For reasons discussed in Sections 2 and 3 we wish
to consider only the qualifying periods for each of these batters, where for
batter i the qualifying periods are defined as
                                        Qi = {j : Nji ≥ 12}.
Then, as in Section 7, let

                                mi = #{j = 1, . . . , 18 : j ∈ Qi }
and delete from the sample any batters with mi < 2. (There were only two
such batters among those who batted at least 100 times in the season.) The
batters still in the sample can be labeled with subscripts i = 1, . . . , P = 419.
   In order to describe the relevant notion of streakiness for the 10 day
period here, consider the statistical model under which Hji ∼ Bin(Nji , pi ),
independent. The null hypothesis that a batter’s performance is not streaky
is
                                  H0i : pji = pi             ∀j ∈ Qi .
An identifiable violation of the null hypothesis indicates streaky performance
by the batter.
  As in (7.2), let
                                                                                 j∋Nji ≥12 Nji Xji
                                                                             P
        Zi2 =                                    2
                  X
(A.1)                       4Nji (Xji − X̂·i )               where X̂·i =                            .
                                                                                  j∋Nji ≥12 Nji
                                                                             P
                j∋Nji ≥12

The tests suggested in Section 7 are based on
                                               χ     2
                                         Ui = Fm i −1
                                                      (Zi2 ),
or, equivalently, on Φ−1 (Ui ). Large values of these statistics are significant.
Accordingly, the P -value for batter i is defined as
                                             Pi = 1 − Ui .
  The FDR procedure for discovering potentially streaky hitters (those who
do not satisfy H0i ) involves choosing a critical level q ∗ and defining
                                                   i
                                                                        
                        k = k (q ) = max i : P(i) ≤ q ∗ .
                            ∗       ∗    ∗
                                                   m
Here, {P(i) } are the ordered P -values. The batters with Pi ≤ P(k∗ ) are
labeled as “discoveries” of those with potentially streaky performance.
Benjamini and Hochberg (1995) show that the expected proportion of false
discoveries is at most q ∗ .
   This type of procedure was applied in Section 7 with the season divided
into periods of two half-seasons, and also with 6 periods corresponding
                      PREDICTION OF BATTING AVERAGES                                 39

(nearly) to calendar months. In both those analyses no discoveries were
declared at level q ∗ = 0.05. In the monthly analysis one discovery could be
declared at a slightly larger level (the batter’s name is C. Izturis; see Table 7
and also below), and no more until the level increased to above q ∗ = 0.3.
   The results with 10-day periods are quite different. At q ∗ = 0.05, there
are 32 discoveries among the 419 candidate players. Several of these 32
discoveries are familiar, regular players. Indeed, among the discoveries the
modal value of mi is the maximum of 18 (9 players) and only 5 of the 32
have values mi ≤ 9.
   Figure 9 is a normal quantile plot of Φ−1 (Ui ) for all players. Under the
null hypothesis that all H0i are true, one would expect to see a (nearly)
straight line.
   It seems clear from this analysis that some players exhibited “streaki-
ness” as measured by performance aggregated to 10 day time spans. (A
more accurate, if less convenient substitute terminology for “streakiness”
here would be “variability in latent performance ability.”) There can be
many potential explanations for such a finding. [Some possibilities could be
runs of favored/unfavored pitchers and/or opposing teams, injury status for
period(s) of the season, personal issues, just plain “streakiness,” etc.] We will
not attempt here to delve further to try to examine patterns of performance
statistics that might lead to belief in one or the other of these explanations.
   In order to display the type of performance(s) that can be classified as
streaky we include some time series plots for a selection of batters classified
as “discoveries” at q ∗ = 0.05. These plots are in terms of their ordinary




Fig. 9. Normal quantile plot of Φ−1 (Ui ). The bold points correspond to values noted as
discoveries at q ∗ = 0.05.
40                                  L. D. BROWN




       Fig. 10.   10 day averages of selected batters identified as “discoveries.”


batting average for each ten day period. We also include their season average
(based only on qualifying periods), their total number of at bats for the
season, their value of Φ−1 (Ui ), and the rank of this value within all the
412 qualifying batters. In interpreting these plots, recall that the values of
Ui involve the players values of Nji = 1, . . . , 18 (which are not shown), along
with the displayed values of their batting averages. Note also that the Y-axes
are not all labeled consistently.
   Albert (2008) uses a different methodology in an attempt to identify
streakiness at a much finer level of duration than 10 days. He identifies
two sets of top ten most streaky batters using two different statistical tech-
niques. There is not much overlap between his top ten lists, nor between his
lists and the 32 players we identified as “discoveries”, as described above.
Only C. Izturis and V. Martinez appear on both of his lists and among our
32 discoveries.

   Acknowledgments. I would like to thank several colleagues for very en-
lightening discussion of earlier drafts of this paper, including the suggestion
                       PREDICTION OF BATTING AVERAGES                                   41

of several references cited in the references. Colleagues who were especially
helpful include K. Shirley (who also prepared the original data set used
here), S. Jensen, D. Small, A. Wyner and L. Zhao.

                        SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
   Major league batting records for 2005 (doi: 10.1214/07-AOAS138supp;
.zip). The file gives monthly batting records (AB and H) for each Major
League baseball players for the 2005 season. The names of the players are
given, as well as a designation as to whether the player is a pitcher or not a
pitcher.

                                   REFERENCES
Albert, J. (2008). Streaky hitting in baseball. J. Quantitative Analysis in Sports 4 Ar-
  ticle 3. Available at http://www.bepress.com/jqas/vol4/iss1/3.
Albert, J. and Bennett, J. (2001). Curve Ball : Baseball, Statistics, and the Role of
  Chance in the Game. Copernicus, New York. MR1835464
Albright, S. C. (1993). A statistical analysis of hitting streaks in baseball (with discus-
  sion). J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 88 1175–1183.
Anscombe, F. J. (1948). The transformation of Poisson, binomial and negative binomial
  data. Biometrika 35 246–254. MR0028556
Bartlett, M. S. (1936). The square root transformation in the analysis of variance.
  J. Roy. Statist. Soc. Suppl. 3 68–78.
Bartlett, M. S. (1947). The use of transformations. Biometrics 3 39–52. MR0020763
Benjamini, Y. and Hochberg, Y. (1995). Controlling the false discovery rate: A practical
  and powerful approach to multiple testing. J. R. Stat. Soc. Ser. B Stat. Methodol. 57
  289–300. MR1325392
Berger, J. O. (1985). Statistical Decision Theory and Bayesian Analysis, 2nd ed.
  Springer, New York. MR0804611
Brown, L. D. (1971). Admissible estimators, recurrent diffusions and insoluble boundary
  value problems. Ann. Math. Statist. 42 855–903. MR0286209
Brown, L. D. (1975). Estimation with incompletely specified loss functions (the case of
  several location parameters). J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 70 417–427. MR0373082
Brown, L. D. (2007). Lecture Notes on Shrinkage Estimation. Available at
  http://www-stat.wharton.upenn.edu/˜lbrown/.
Brown, L. D. (2008). Supplement to “In-season prediction of batting averages: A field
  test of empirical Bayes and Bayes methodologies.” DOI: 10.1214/07-AOAS138SUPP.
Brown, L. D. and Greenshtein, E. (2007). Empirical Bayes and compound decision
  approaches for estimation of a high dimensional vector of normal means. Manuscript.
Brown, L. D. and Zhao, L. (2002). A new test for the Poisson distribution. Sankhyā
  Ser. A 64 611–625. MR1985402
Brown, L. D. and Zhao, L. (2006). Estimators for Gaussian models having a block-wise
  structure. Available at http://www-stat.wharton.upenn.edu/˜lbrown/.
Brown, K. D. and Zhao, L. (2007). A unified view of regression, shrink-
  age, empirical Bayes, hierarchical Bayes, and random effects. Available at
  http://www-stat.wharton.upenn.edu/˜lbrown/.
Brown, L. D., Cai, T., Zhang, R., Zhao, L. and Zhou, H. (2007). The root-unroot
  algorithm for density estimation as implemented via wavelet block thresholding. Avail-
  able at http://www-stat.wharton.upenn.edu/˜lbrown/.
42                                   L. D. BROWN

Efron, B. (2003). Robbins, empirical Bayes and microarrays. Ann. Statist. 31 366–378.
  MR1983533
Efron, B. and Morris, C. (1975). Data analysis using Stein’s estimator and its gener-
  alizations. J. Amer. Stat. Assoc. 70 311–319. MR0391403
Efron, B. and Morris, C. (1977). Stein’s paradox in statistics. Scientific American 236
  119–127.
Freeman, M. F. and Tukey, J. W. (1950). Transformations related to the angular and
  the square root. Ann. Math. Statist. 21 607–611. MR0038028
Frey, J. (2007). Is an .833 hitter better than a .338 hitter? The American Statistician 61
  105–111. MR2368098
Gilovich, T., Vallone, R. and Tversky, A. (1985). The hot hand in basketball: On
  the misperception of random sequences. Cognitive Psychology 17 295–314.
James, W. and Stein, C. (1961). Estimation with quadratic loss. Proc. 4th Berkeley
  Symp. Probab. Statist. 1 367–379. Univ. California Press, Berkeley. MR0133191
Lehmann, E. and Casella, G. (1998). The Theory of Point Estimation, 2nd ed. Springer,
  New York. MR1639875
Lewis, M. (2004). Moneyball : The Art of Winning an Unfair Game. W. W. Norton, New
  York.
Lindley, D. (1962). Discussion on Proffesor Stein’s paper. J. Roy. Statist. Soc. B 24
  285–287.
Mosteller, F. and Youtz, C. (1961). Tables of the Freeman–Tukey transformation for
  the binomial and Poisson distribution. Biometrika 48 433–450. MR0132623
Robbins, H. (1951). An empirical Bayes approach to statistics. Proc. 3rd Berkeley Symp.
  Math. Statist. Probab. 1 157–163. Univ. California Press, Berkeley. MR0084919
Robbins, H. (1956). Asymptotically subminimax solutions of compound statistical deci-
  sion problems. Proc. 2nd Berkeley Symp. Math. Statist. Probab. 131–148. Univ. Cali-
  fornia Press, Berkeley. MR0044803
Stein, C. (1962). Confidence sets for the mean of a multivariate normal distribution (with
  discussion). J. Roy. Statist. Soc. Ser. B 24 265–296. MR0148184
Stein, C. (1973). Estimation of the mean of a multivariate normal distribution. In Proc.
  Prague Symp. on Asymptotic Statistics II (Charles Univ., Prague, 1973 ) 345–381.
  Charles Univ., Prague. MR0381062
Stein, C. (1981). Estimation of the mean of a multivariate normal distribution. Ann.
  Statist. 9 1135–1151. MR0630098
Stern, H. (2005). Baseball decision making by the numbers. In Statistics: A Guide to the
  Unknown, 4th ed. (R. Peck, G. Casella, G. Cobb, R. Hoerl, D. Nolan, R. Starbuck and
  H. Stern, eds.) 393–406. Duxbury Press, Pacific Grove, CA.
Strawderman, W. E. (1971). Proper Bayes estimators of the multivariate normal mean.
  Ann. Math. Statist. 42 385–388. MR0397939
Strawderman, W. E. (1973). Proper Bayes minimax estimators of the multivariate nor-
  mal mean for the case of common unknown variances. Ann. Math. Statist. 44 1189–1194.
  MR0365806

                                                       Department of Statistics
                                                       University of Pennsylvania
                                                       Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104
                                                       USA
                                                       E-mail: lbrown@wharton.upenn.edu
