The Advantage of Doubling: A Deep Reinforcement Learning
    Approach to Studying the Double Team in the NBA
 Jiaxuan Wang*, Ian Fox*, Jonathan Skaza, Nick Linck, Satinder Singh, Jenna Wiens
                     University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI
                              *These authors contributed equally to this work
                                                   Abstract
 During the 2017 NBA playoffs, Celtics coach Brad Stevens was faced with a difficult decision
 when defending against the Cavaliers: ``Do you double and risk giving up easy shots, or stay at
 home and do the best you can?"1 It's a tough call, but finding a good defensive strategy that
 effectively incorporates doubling can make all the difference in the NBA. In this paper, we
 analyze double teaming in the NBA, quantifying the trade-off between risk and reward. Using
 player trajectory data pertaining to over 643,000 possessions, we identified when the ball
 handler was double teamed. Given these data and the corresponding outcome (i.e., was the
 defense successful), we used deep reinforcement learning to estimate the quality of the
 defensive actions. We present qualitative and quantitative results summarizing our learned
 defensive strategy for defending. We show that our policy value estimates are predictive of
 points per possession and win percentage. Overall, the proposed framework represents a step
 toward a more comprehensive understanding of defensive strategies in the NBA.

 1 Introduction
 In basketball, most defensive metrics focus on discrete and sporadic events, e.g., blocked shots,
 steals, and deflected passes. However, a good defensive play embodies much more than such
 snapshots capture [2, 7]. For example, throughout a possession, a good defense might force a player
 into a poor shot location, or force the ball handler to take a series of sub-optimal actions. In this
 work, we quantitatively measure defensive impact by studying the use and effectiveness of double
 teaming in the NBA.
 When used judiciously, the double team can slow strong offensive players. For example, in Game 4
 of the 2015 NBA finals, the Warriors held LeBron to only 20 points and 8 assists by effectively
 double teaming him. At the same time, doubling against such players can be risky. Doubling one
 player leaves another player open. How to balance this trade-off is an important question in the
 NBA and one that can depend on many different factors. According to Andre Iguodala, LeBron's
 primary defender, “A guy like LeBron who can pass the ball the way he can, you’ve got to see where
 his eyes are. If he can see the whole floor, it’s tough to double a guy like that.”2 Effective double
 teaming involves reasoning over the entire court configuration (e.g., where and who the players
 are) and anticipating the ball handler's next move. One’s double teaming strategy must account for
 the offensive strategy of the opponent.
 To characterize the effect of doubling in the NBA, we studied player tracking data from 643,147
 possessions. Using a rule-based action detector, we assess how the double team is used by NBA

 1 cited from http://www.espn.com/nba/story/_/id/19407546/boston-celtics-coach-brad-stevens-says-team-risk-
 double-teaming-cleveland-cavaliers-lebron-james
 2 cited from http://nba.nbcsports.com/2015/06/13/golden-state-and-the-art-of-double-teaming-lebron-james/

                                                                                2018 Research Papers Competition
                                                                                         Presented by:

                                                        1
defenses and identify situations when it is most effective. Building on this initial analysis, we
propose an approach for learning a defensive strategy for when and where to double team. More
specifically, we consider a reinforcement learning (RL) framework, in which we quantify the
relationship between the court configuration (i.e., state), the decision to double team and whom to
leave open (i.e., action), and the outcome in terms of points per possession (i.e., reward). To deal
with the infinite number of court configurations, we use deep RL with a convolutional neural
network architecture, we call NothingButNet (NBNet), designed specifically for the task. We train
our network to learn a mapping from state and actions to expected cumulative reward. From this
mapping, one can construct a policy by selecting the action that maximizes expected reward.
We evaluate the proposed approach on data from the three most recent seasons (including the
playoffs). We compare the learned strategy against the actual strategies used. We found that our
network’s estimate of state-action values had a significant correlation with possession outcomes on
a held-out test set (p<0.001) and appears to correlate with overall win percentage.
Others have used reinforcement learning to study the effect that field goal attempts have on
subsequent 3-pt shot attempts [11], and have used neural networks for play classification [15]. In
soccer, recent work has looked at leveraging imitation learning to simulate the outcome of different
defensive positions [7]. However, we are the first to use reinforcement learning to study defensive
strategies in the NBA. Our use of reinforcement learning (as opposed to supervised or imitation
learning) allows us to learn new strategies for double teaming, as opposed to predicting expected
outcomes under current play. Our work represents a step toward a more comprehensive
understanding and evaluation of defensive play.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 details the proposed methods
including how we define states, actions, and rewards. Section 3 explains our evaluation scheme,
including how we use the learned networks to quantify the advantage of double teaming. In
addition, Section 3 presents results from the application of the proposed method to three seasons
worth of data, summarizing trends across the league, teams and players.

2 Methods
We begin with a brief overview of reinforcement learning, introducing definitions and notations
used throughout the paper. We then present our proposed method for learning how to effectively
double team.
2.1     Background and Notation
Here, we briefly review the reinforcement learning (RL) framework; for an in-depth review of RL
we refer the reader to [12]. In an RL setting, an agent interacts sequentially with an environment,
soliciting a reward. This is commonly modeled using a Markov Decision Process (MDP) 𝑀 =
(𝒮, 𝒜, 𝒫, ℛ, 𝛾) where 𝒮 is the state space, 𝒜 is the action space, 𝒫 is a transition probability function
from state and action to next state, ℛ is a stochastic function from 𝒮 × 𝒜 → ℝ and 𝛾 ∈ [0, 1] is the
discount factor for the reward. In an episodic setting, an agent observes the current state 𝑠𝑡 ∈ 𝒮 ,
chooses an action 𝑎𝑡 ∈ 𝒜 , and then transitions to 𝑠𝑡+1, according to some probability distribution 𝒫𝑠 𝑎𝑡 .
In addition, the agent receives an instantaneous reward, 𝑟𝑡 ≔ ℛ(𝑠𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 ). This process continues until
reaching a terminal state at time step 𝑇 (i.e., the end of the episode).

In this setting, the agent aims to maximize the expected value of cumulative discounted reward 𝐺𝑡 ∶=
∑𝑇𝑡=𝑡0 𝛾 𝑡−𝑡0 𝑟𝑡 . An agent behaves according to some policy 𝜋 where 𝜋(𝑎|𝑠) ≔ 𝒫𝑠 𝑎𝑡 The optimal state-


                                                                           2018 Research Papers Competition
                                                                                    Presented by:

                                                     2
action value function 𝑄𝜋 (𝑠, 𝑎) is the expected cumulative reward of starting in state 𝑠, executing
                           ∗


action 𝑎, and then following the optimal policy 𝜋 ∗ . Formally, 𝑄𝜋 (𝑠, 𝑎) = max
                                                                   ∗
                                                                                 𝔼𝑎𝑡+1:𝑇−1∼𝜋 [𝐺𝑡 |𝑠𝑡 = 𝑠, 𝑎𝑡 = 𝑎] .
                                                                               𝜋
In addition to state-action value, we define optimal state value 𝑉 (𝑠) = 𝑚𝑎𝑥𝑎 𝑄𝜋 (𝑠, 𝑎). Finally, we
                                                                      𝜋∗              ∗


define the state-action advantage as 𝐴𝜋 (𝑠, 𝑎) = 𝑄𝜋 (𝑠, 𝑎) − 𝑉 𝜋 (𝑠) , or the expected difference in
                                          ∗          ∗          ∗


cumulative reward had 𝑎 been selected.
In the next section, we explain how we use this framework to find the optimal policy for double
teaming. We begin by defining the set of actions 𝒜, our state representation 𝒮, and the reward ℛ.
2.2     Double Teaming with an RL Framework
Applied to player trajectory data, the RL framework considers each possession as an episode. The
episode begins once all players have crossed half court and concludes when the shot clock resets.
We discretize these episodes into 1 second windows. From the defense’s perspective, at each
second, the team (i.e., agent) must make a decision (e.g., to double team the ball handler or not).
This decision can depend on many factors including the status of the game, which players are on the
court, and player locations. Ultimately, this sequence of decisions results in an outcome
determining the total cumulative reward (e.g., a blocked shot). Intuitively, if the defense makes a
series of poor or sub-optimal decisions, the offense will score, and the resulting reward will be
lower than if the defense had made better decisions. Below, we provide additional details regarding
how we i) define and detect actions, ii) handle the continuous state space and iii) measure reward.
2.2.1 Action Space and Action Detector
While the defense is faced with myriad decisions during play, we
focus on the decision of whether or not to double team the ball
handler. We define a discrete action space based on the location of
the open player. We discretize the court into 19 different regions, in
keeping with [1] (Figure 1). Given this court discretization and the
location of players on the court, we label each 1-second window
with one of 20 possible actions. The defense can either decide to
stay, or double team the ball handler. Since the player the defense
chooses to leave open can be in any one of the 19 regions, this
presents 20 possible actions in total. However, for any given state,
                                                                       Figure 1. We discretize the half
only a subset of actions are valid, since it is infeasible to leave an court into 19 distinct regions.
open man in a region not occupied by an offensive player. Thus, the
set of feasible actions at each time 𝒜𝑡 ⊂ 𝒜 depends upon 𝑠𝑡 , where 𝑎 ∈ 𝒜𝑡 if and only if 𝑎 is the
null action (no double teaming) or 𝑎 corresponds to leaving an open man in a region occupied by an
offensive player (excluding the ball handler) in 𝑠𝑡 .
To detect the action of double teaming in the data, we developed the simple rule-based classifier
described below. We tried using the `Who’s Guarding Whom’ system to detect double teaming [2],
but ultimately found that an action detector tailored to the specific problem of double teaming was
more accurate. The classifier looks for the presence of at least two defensive players within a radius
of the ball handler, while accounting for the possibility that two offensive players are close to one
another, bringing the defense close (but not double teaming). We summarize this rule in Figure 2.
To ensure that this simple rule could accurately capture double teaming, we compared its
annotations with those given by two humans on a random subset of 100 possessions. We found that
the action detector performed within the level of inter-rater agreement, see Figure 2(c),
demonstrating that it is a reasonable approach to detecting double teams.

                                                                                 2018 Research Papers Competition
                                                                                          Presented by:

                                                         3
                                                                      Annotator 1        Annotator 2       Auto Detector
                                                  Annotator 1             1.000              0.642               0.732
                                                  Annotator 2             0.642              1.000               0.723
                                                 Auto Detector            0.732              0.723               1.000
   (a) Doubling        (b) Not Doubling                             (c) Proportion of agreement between annotators

  Figure 2. Identifying double teams. In (a), we find two defensive players within the defensive radius of the starred player,
  removed from the other offensive players  doubling. In (b) one of the defensive players is within the defensive radius of
  another offensive player  not doubling. In (c) we see that the model agrees with the human annotators more often
  (72.3% and 73.2%) than the humans agree with each other (64.2%).

When labeling possessions based on the presence of double teaming, we consider those
possessions in which the defense selects a ``double team" action for at least two consecutive 1-
second windows as double teaming. Note that this does not necessarily mean the defense was
doubling for two seconds, just that the action occurred over the course of two windows. This
eliminates short-lived ``double teams'' that occur during screens or during drives to the basket.
2.2.2 State Representation
The decision to double team or not can depend on many factors. We try to account for as many as
possible by considering a continuous state representation that encapsulates player trajectories,
player heights, weights, shooting abilities, current state of the game, shot clock, and game clock. As
input to our network, we use both images, as in [3], and flat features.
Our image representation includes three types of channels: i) one court channel encoding the
region number, as defined in Figure 1, of each pixel, ii) 11 trajectory channels (for the 10 players
and ball), and iii) five offensive player shooting percentage channels, each of size 47×50 in the pixel
space (i.e., the half court discretized by square feet). Building upon work by Harmon et al., we
convert the player trajectories, from their original (𝑥, 𝑦)-coordinate format to an image
representation. For each player on the court, we build an image of his trajectory over a 1-second
window. The pixel value for a player location exponentially decreases going
back in time, directly encoding temporal information into the image. Finally,
we include an additional image channel for each offensive player on the
court, capturing their shooting percentages across different regions. When
estimating shooting percentages, we use data up to but not including the
current game so as to respect the causal ordering of events. This results in a
sparse 17 channel image (as opposed to a standard 3 channel RGB image).
The channels are sorted across images by team and position within a team
to preserve image semantics across examples (i.e., the 1st channel                Figure 3. Trajectory over 1
contains the trajectory of the offensive center if one is fielded). A sample     second of play. Each color
                                                                                 represents a unique channel.
trajectory is given in Figure 3.
In addition to these image inputs, we include flat features that do not have a spatial component.
These flat features pertain to the shot clock, game clock, quarter, and weight and height of each
player on the court. Again, we order the player features according to player team and position. After
binning continuous values based on quintiles, the resulting feature vector consisted of 93 flat
features. These were fed into the model along with the image channel input (Figure 4).



                                                                                     2018 Research Papers Competition
                                                                                              Presented by:

                                                            4
  Figure 4. NBNet architecture. We use a convolution neural network (ConvNet) to extract visual features from the
  court together with a fully connected network to incorporate flat features. The final hidden layers are split into
  value and advantage streams that output 𝑉(𝑠) and 𝐴(𝑠, 𝑎) respectively, with output 𝑄(𝑠, 𝑎) = 𝑉(𝑠) + 𝐴(𝑠, 𝑎).
  FC: fully connected

2.2.3 Reward
We consider a reward signal based on the points obtained over a possession. In our setting, only the
final second of a possession is associated with non-zero reward. By removing the discount factor,
the total cumulative reward at any point during the possession is equal to the terminal reward. If a
foul occurs, we include the result of the free throws in our reward. Because we consider each
possession from the perspective of the defense, the reward equals the negative points scored and
takes on values in the set {0, −1, . . ., −5}, the closer to 0, the better.
2.3     Model Architecture and Training
Given the RL framework discussed above, we train a state-action value estimator to learn a
mapping 𝑠 → 𝑄 𝜋 (𝑠, 𝑎) for all actions 𝑎 ∈ 𝒜. We use a dueling convolutional neural net as our
estimator [16]. Such architectures natively separate state-value and action advantage. They have
been demonstrated to be a competitive architecture for vision-based control [5].
State-action networks learn the Q-values for each action 𝑎𝑡 given a state 𝑠𝑡 , at some particular time
step 𝑡 by minimizing the temporal difference error across the 𝑁 episodes in the training set
{𝑠1𝑖 , 𝑎1𝑖 , 𝑟1𝑖 , … , 𝑠𝑇𝑖 𝑖−1 , 𝑎𝑖𝑇𝑖−1 , 𝑟𝑇𝑖 𝑖−1 , 𝑠𝑇𝑖 𝑖 }𝑁
                                                           𝑖=1 :
                                             𝑁 𝑇𝑖 −1
                                                       ∗                     ∗
                                       ℒ = ∑ ∑ [𝑄 𝜋 (𝑠𝑡𝑖 , 𝑎𝑡𝑖 ) − (𝑟𝑡𝑖 + 𝑉 𝜋 (𝑠𝑡+1
                                                                                𝑖
                                                                                    ))]2
                                            𝑖=1 𝑡=1




                                                                                      2018 Research Papers Competition
                                                                                               Presented by:

                                                            5
                                                                    ∗          ∗
     Where 𝜋 ∗ represents the policy, and both 𝑄 𝜋 and 𝑉 𝜋 are estimated using the network (though to
                                       ∗
     improve stability we estimate 𝑉 𝜋 using a periodically cached version of our network as in [10]).
     Given the training data, we learn a state-action network using a policy that is greedy with respect to
     the value estimates:
                                                                                             ∗
                                                               1,       𝑖𝑓 a = argmax 𝑄 𝜋 (𝑠𝑡 , 𝑎)
                                             𝜋 ∗ (𝑎|𝑠𝑡 ) = {                       𝑎∈𝒜𝑡
                                                               0,                         otherwise


                                                                                      ∗
                                                      𝑉 𝜋 ∗ (𝑠𝑡+1 ) = max 𝑄 𝜋 (𝑠𝑡+1 , 𝑎)
                                                                          𝑎 ∈𝒜𝑡+1

     The feasible action set 𝒜𝑡 is used both for policy predictions and value estimation. This approach of
     policy learning via value estimation is called Q-learning. Given unlimited exploratory training data,
     such a policy is provably optimal for any finite size MDP [17]. However, our use of historical data
     means we cannot sufficiently explore the state-action space to make such guarantees. Training deep
     neural networks with Q-learning was first shown to be viable for vision-based control in [10]. To
     improve the Q-value estimates, we use double Q-learning as described in [14]. An overview of our
     full NBNet architecture is given in Figure 4. Our model implementation and training code is
     available online3.

     3 Evaluation and Results
     We trained and evaluated on data collected from the SportVU optical tracking dataset augmented
     with play-by-play data. These data have been previously described by [8,9,18]. We considered data
     from the three most recent seasons, totaling 875,412 possessions. For our analysis, we excluded
     possessions in which not all of the players cross half-court, since these represent transition plays in
     which the use of double teaming may differ. This results in a final set of 643,147 possessions. In our
     first set of results, we summarize the application of our action detector to the data. We identify how
     often teams use the double team, and when and where it appears most effective. We then move on
     to present an in-depth analysis of the learned value function, demonstrating the promise of an
     observational RL framework for value estimation.
     3.1      Observational Analysis
                                                We labeled each of the 643,147 possessions as Double if we
                                                detected that the defense double teamed the ball handler (based
                                                on our action detector, Section 2.2.1) for at least 2 consecutive
                                                seconds, and No Double otherwise. In total, 4.8% were labeled as
                                                Double. This fraction varied across teams from 3.8% (Portland)
                                                to 6.7% (Milwaukee). The majority of teams tend to double team
                                                the ball handler between 4-5% of possessions.
                                                After labeling each possession, we grouped possessions by
                                                outcome. Each possession fell into one of six possible categories:
Figure 5. Relative frequencies of outcomes
for possessions in which the ball handler       2pt made/missed, 3pt made/missed, foul, or turnover. Double
was and was not double teamed. Error            teaming is inherently a high-risk, high-reward decision. The
bars correspond to empirical 95%                distribution over outcomes associated with double teaming
confidence intervals.                           reflects this trade off (Figure 5). Overall, double teaming results

     3 https://github.com/igfox/AdvantageOfDoubling

                                                                                                      2018 Research Papers Competition
                                                                                                               Presented by:

                                                                          6
in a significantly lower field goal percentage for the offense. However, this comes at the expense of
a significantly greater likelihood of the possession ending in a foul.
                               Next, we looked at the data from the perspective of the ball handler,
                               investigating what actions were taken immediately following a double
                               team and the outcome. Across the NBA, when double teamed ball
                               handlers predominantly tend to pass or dribble the ball, shooting only
                               6.2% of the time when double teamed (Figure 6).
                             To assess which offensive players perform best when double teamed, we
                             measured a team's overall points per possession when a given player was
 Figure 6. Once double       on the court and compared this to the team's points per possession (ppp)
 teamed, a player can
 choose to either pass,
                             when that given player was double teamed. Here, we restricted our
 shoot, or dribble the ball, analysis to players who faced at least 150 double teams. Among guards,
 but most choose to pass     John Wall emerged as the most effective player against the double team.
                             On average, Wall's team scored 1.07ppp when he was double teamed
versus 0.89ppp when he was not. This increase may reflect Wall's ability to effectively utilize the
open man. Lou Williams is the guard most negatively affected by the double team (0.68ppp vs.
0.95ppp). Among forwards, Rudy Gay comes up as most effective (0.86 ppp vs. 0.98ppp). On the
other end of the spectrum, Kevin Durant is most negatively affected (0.99 ppp vs. 0.90 ppp).
In Figure 7, we plot the average
ppp for each of the above
players, categorized by the
decision the offensive player
made once they were double
teamed. It appears more
beneficial for the player to pass
the ball rather than keep the ball
themselves. Despite this fact,
players do not always make this
decision as seen in Figure 6.
                                          Figure 7. Expected points per possession when players decide to
                                          dribble or pass when double teamed.


                                          In addition to considering what the offense does when faced
                                          with a double team, we also looked at how the defense fares.
                                          We examined all tandems with at least 50 double teams over
                                          the last three seasons. Figure 8 illustrates the relationship
                                          among field goals, fouls committed, and turnovers forced for
                                          each of these pairs. The pairing of Kyle Lowry and Jonas
                                          Valanciunas led all pairings in terms of fewest points allowed
                                          per possession (0.64), followed by Chris Paul and DeAndre
                                          Jordan (0.70) and Klay Thompson and Draymond Green
                                          (0.74). The tandem of Ricky Rubio and Karl-Anthony Towns
                                          was most proficient at forcing turnovers out of the double
                                          team--21.4% of their double teams resulted in a turnover.
Figure 8. Relationship between
Field Goals, Turnovers, and Fouls         The results from this empirical analysis begin to shed light on
(indicated by dot size) for tandems       the tough decisions teams must make with respect to when
with at least 50 double teams.
                                                                                2018 Research Papers Competition
                                                                                         Presented by:

                                                       7
and whom to double team. In the next section, we take a closer look at the value behind the
decisions teams are making, while controlling for additional factors through an RL approach.
3.2      Reinforcement Learning Analysis
In this section, to control for the effect of the offensive team, we consider how teams defend against
a single team. We focus on the Cleveland Cavaliers, since the Cavs i) had a lot of data (so that we
could learn a policy), ii) had a relatively stable roster (so that its offensive strategy did not vary too
much) and iii) are strong offensively (so that good defense is necessary).
Focusing on just offensive possessions for the Cleveland Cavaliers resulted in 22,695 possessions.
After splitting the data randomly on possessions, we trained the network on 70% of the data,
validated our results on 10%, and performed our final evaluations on the remaining 20%. Applied
to a held-out possession 𝜏𝑖 = (𝑠1𝑖 , 𝑎1𝑖, 𝑟1𝑖 , 𝑠2𝑖 , 𝑎2𝑖 , 𝑟2𝑖 , … , 𝑠𝑇𝑖 𝑖 ), at each time-step, 𝑡, the learned network
estimates the Q-values, 𝑄𝜋 (𝑠𝑡𝑖 , 𝑎) for all 𝑎 ∈ 𝒜𝑡 for each of the feasible actions given the state
                            ∗


representation 𝑠𝑡 .
                  𝑖

The quantitative evaluation of policies on data collected off-policy is challenging. While several
recent advances have been made in methods for off-policy evaluation [6, 11], they require that the
behavior policy have a known distribution. This does not hold in our scenario, and assuming a
deterministic behavior policy would severely limit our evaluation data (requiring that we evaluate
only on trajectories that already follow 𝜋 ∗). Since we do not correct for changes to the data
distribution generated under the learned policy, the Q-values we report when following 𝜋 ∗ are
biased [6, 13]. Despite this fact, we still observe that our learned policy correlates with an increased
expected reward. 19 of the 20 actions correspond to double teaming. Because of this, the learned
policy suggests double teaming far more often than not (in 90.6% of possessions). To mitigate this
effect, we suppressed the selection of a double team action unless its Q-value exceeded that of the
man-to-man action by at least 0.2. We selected this threshold using the validation data, verifying
that the average Q-values still correlated with observed outcomes. Once we applied this post-
processing step, the learned policy suggested double teaming in 29.29% of possessions. This is
closer to the observed double teaming ratio of 33.92% when double teaming is defined on a per-
second basis.


                                                                              Figure 9. We look at the estimated Q-
                                                                              values averaged over the course of a
                                                                              possession compared to the observed
                                                                              number of points scored at the end of the
                                                                              possession. As expected, we see a
                                                                              downward trend where a defensive `stop'
                                                                              corresponds to higher Q-values. This has
                                                                              correlation -0.08 (p < 0.001)




                                                                                     2018 Research Papers Competition
                                                                                              Presented by:

                                                            8
 How predictive are the Q-values? Given a set of 4,482 held-out possessions, we evaluated the
                                                                 accuracy of the learned network by comparing
                                                                 the estimated Q-values associated with the
                                                                                                         ∗
                                                                 action taken at each time step t, 𝑄 𝜋 (𝑠𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 ), to
                                                                 the observed outcome (i.e., points scored by
                                                                 the offense). That is, we computed 𝑞𝑎𝑣𝑔 (𝑖) =
                                                                 1 𝑇𝑖         ∗
                                                                   ∑ 𝑄𝜋 (𝑠𝑡𝑖 , 𝑎𝑡𝑖 ) for each possession 𝑖. If the
                                                                 𝑇𝑖 𝑡=1
                                                                 network is a good estimator, then a higher
                                                                 𝑞𝑎𝑣𝑔 should be associated with a lower number
                                                                 of points scored (since this represents a good
                                                                 outcome for the defense). In Figure 9 we plot
                                                                 𝑞𝑎𝑣𝑔 against the observed outcome across
                                                                 possessions in the test set. For clarity, we
                                                                 binned the averaged Q-values into deciles and
                                                                 report the average score within each decile.
                                                                 Note that the regression line is fit to the
                                                                 underlying data, not the bin values. We
                                                                 observe the expected downward trend. That
  Figure 10. Observed (left figures) and learned policies
  (right figures) for double teaming Kyrie Irving at the 3-      is, a higher average Q-value is associated with
  point line. The top figures depict possessions when Kyrie is   fewer points scored (i.e., a good defensive
  at the left wing of the 3 point line, while the bottom figures outcome). We also observe a tight clustering of
  depict cases when Kyrie is at the right wing of the 3 point    mean Q-values within the range -1 to 0. This
  line. The observed and learned policies differ significantly.
  The observed policy demonstrates many open players are
                                                                 indicates that our Q-values are positively
  left in the back, while the learned policy suggests the extra  biased relative to the expected cumulative
  defender should come from the inner court. Both the            reward, as the average reward is around -1.4.
  observed and learned policies demonstrate significant          This upward bias of Q-values is a well-known
  asymmetry, showing that it's better to leave an open           problem in Q-learning [4]. Despite this bias,
  player away from the ball handler
                                                                 the Q-values are predictive of reward, a highly
                                                                 encouraging result. In addition, we observed
                                                                 that the Q-values are associated with higher-
                                                                 level measures of team performance. Figure
                                                                 12 shows a positive correlation between
                                                                 team-wise 𝑞𝑎𝑣𝑔 and win percentage against
                                                                 the Cavs.
                                                                 Visualizing the Learned Policy. Once we
                                                                 established that the estimates for the Q-values
                                                                 were reasonable, we performed both
                                                                 qualitative and quantitative analyses of the
                                                                 learned policy. In particular, again on held-out
                                                                 data, we compared the distribution over
                                                                 actions suggested by the learned policy 𝜋 ∗ to
Figure 11. Percentage of time we observe teams double            the empirical distribution of observed actions.
teaming individual players (obs) and percentage of time          That is, for each observed state and action
our learned policy suggests double teaming those same
players (learn).                                                 pair, (𝑠𝑡𝑖 , 𝑎𝑡𝑖 ), we compared how 𝑎𝑡𝑖 differs from
                                                                         ∗
                                                              argmax 𝑄 𝜋 (𝑠𝑡 , 𝑎).
                                                                 𝑎




                                                                                     2018 Research Papers Competition
                                                                                              Presented by:

                                                         9
 To try to get at the question of how a team might improve their double teaming strategy, we focus
 on double teaming Kyrie Irving. We looked at all instances in which Kyrie had the ball around the
 perimeter (at least 15 feet from the basket). For each time step that meets these criteria, we
 considered the observed action versus the action suggested by 𝜋 ∗. For those cases in which the
 defense decided to double team Kyrie, Figure 10 shows the locations of the open players (left), and
 where the open player should have been had the teams been acting according to 𝜋 ∗ (right). We
 observe the counter-intuitive result that it is better to leave an open man in the paint than in the
 back. This could suggest that it's important for the double teamer to position himself such that he
 blocks a potential pass to the open man. The fact that the network learns to capitalize on the
 asymmetry of the situations, as evidenced by values within the paint, indicates the policy is
 responding to positional information in 𝑠𝑡 .
 In addition to where to leave the open man, we can look how often we should be double teaming
 certain players. Figure 11 shows differences in double teaming trends across players with the
 observed versus learned policy. Our learned approach is more hesitant to double team star players,
 and is more likely to double team role players.




                                                                                Figure 13. The performance and potential of
                                                                                                           ∗
                                                                                teams as measured by 𝑄 𝜋 (𝑠𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 ). The leftmost
                                                                                bars indicate advantage, the left ranking is done on
Figure 12. An analysis of each team’s empirical performance, as measured by     Q-values, the right is done on potential under
                                                              ∗
win percentage, against their performance as evaluated by 𝑄 𝜋 . We see a                         ∗
                                                                                optimal play (𝑉 𝜋 )
                                                                            ∗
strong relationship between the measures, indicating the reliability of 𝑄 𝜋



 Who’s the best (and who could improve)? The average Q-value associated with the trajectory of
 states and actions for a possession may be high due to either the value of the state, or the advantage
 conferred by the selected actions. For example, if none of the players on the Cavs' starting line-up
 are on the court, then the Q-value will be high since the team is less likely to score. Thus, we
 separate out the advantage from the Q-value, shown in Figure 13. The ranking in the plot
 corresponds to the average 𝑞𝑎𝑣𝑔 for each team. We only consider teams who played the Cavs in the
 playoffs, since this provides more data to train and evaluate on. We sort the graph from the bottom
 to the top (the higher the better) using 𝑞𝑎𝑣𝑔 over all relevant possessions. The left-most bar
                                                                               ∗
 corresponds to the magnitude of average advantage for each team (i.e., 𝐴𝜋 (𝑠𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 )). The right
                                                                                 ∗
 ranking is done using the theoretical optimal performance of the teams (𝑉 𝜋 (𝑠𝑡 )). From this plot,
 we observe that Chicago and Golden State are currently best at defending against the Cavs, while

                                                                                     2018 Research Papers Competition
                                                                                              Presented by:

                                                            10
Indiana has great potential under “optimal” play. Notably, all teams can improve their defense
under the learned policy.

4 Conclusion
In this paper, we developed a framework for studying the double team in the NBA. Using a rule-
based action detector, we labeled hundreds of thousands of possessions from the last three seasons
as either containing a double team or not. We then applied a deep reinforcement learning approach
to learn a mapping from court/game configuration to the action that minimizes the number of
points scored by the offense.
There are several limitations to our analysis due mostly to the fact that we only have observational
data. First, 𝜋 ∗ learned in this work is optimal only with respect to the state-action pairs explored in
the data. Second, while it is typical to evaluate learned policies through application or a simulator,
we are limited to evaluating on observed state-action pairs. Third, while we pooled data from
across three seasons, there is still a limited number of observations for both training and evaluation
purposes. Finally, we rely on a rule-based action detector for identifying double teams and are thus
limited by the accuracy of this detector. Future work could improve the action-detector which
would in turn impact the RL results.
This work represents the first time that defensive strategy in the NBA has been analyzed using an
RL framework. Though preliminary, it demonstrates the potential for algorithmic analyses of the
types of problems plaguing coaches. While we chose to focus on doubling, the proposed framework
generalizes beyond this specific task. By modifying the defined action space, the same approach
could be used to answer other questions about offensive and defensive strategy. Going forward, the
proposed approach could be applied to player tracking data across several different settings to
study sequential decision making in the NBA.



References
[1] Chang, Yu-Han, et al. "Quantifying shot quality in the NBA." Proceedings of the 8th Annual MIT
Sloan Sports Analytics Conference. MIT, Boston, MA. 2014.
[2] Franks, Alexander, et al. "Counterpoints: Advanced defensive metrics for NBA
basketball." Proceedings of the 9th Annual MIT Sloan Sports Analytics Conference, Boston, MA. 2015.
[3] Harmon, Mark, Patrick Lucey, and Diego Klabjan. "Predicting Shot Making in Basketball using
Convolutional Neural Networks Learnt from Adversarial Multiagent Trajectories." arXiv preprint
arXiv:1609.04849 (2016).
[4] Hasselt, Hado V. "Double Q-learning." Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. 2010.
[5] Hessel, Matteo, et al. "Rainbow: Combining Improvements in Deep Reinforcement
Learning." arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.02298 (2017).
[6] Jiang, Nan, and Lihong Li. "Doubly robust off-policy value evaluation for reinforcement
learning." arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.03722 (2015).
[7] Le, Hoang M., et al. "Data-driven ghosting using deep imitation learning." Proceedings of the 11th
Annual MIT Sloan Sports Analytics Conference. MIT, Boston, MA. 2017.[8] McIntyre, Avery et al.,


                                                                        2018 Research Papers Competition
                                                                                 Presented by:

                                                  11
“Recognizing and Analyzing Ball Screen Defense in the NBA”, Proceedings of the 10th Annual MIT
Sloan Sports Analytics Conference. MIT, Boston, MA. 2016.
[9] McQueen, Armand et al. “Automatically Recognizing On-Ball Screens.” Proceedings of the 8th
Annual MIT Sloan Sports Analytics Conference. MIT, Boston, MA. 2014.
[10] Mnih, Volodymyr, et al. "Human-level control through deep reinforcement
learning." Nature 518.7540 (2015): 529-533.
[11] Neiman, Tal, and Yonatan Loewenstein. "Reinforcement learning in professional basketball
players." Nature communications 2 (2011): 569.
[12] Sutton, Richard S., and Andrew G. Barto. Reinforcement learning: An introduction. Vol. 1. No. 1.
Cambridge: MIT press, 1998.
[13] Thomas, Philip, and Emma Brunskill. "Data-efficient off-policy policy evaluation for
reinforcement learning." International Conference on Machine Learning. 2016.
[14] Van Hasselt, Hado, Arthur Guez, and David Silver. "Deep Reinforcement Learning with Double
Q-Learning." AAAI. 2016.
[15] Wang, Kuan-Chieh, and Richard Zemel. "Classifying NBA offensive plays using neural
networks." Proc. MIT SLOAN Sports Analytics Conf. 2016.
[16] Wang, Ziyu, et al. "Dueling network architectures for deep reinforcement learning." arXiv
preprint arXiv:1511.06581(2015).
[17] Watkins, Christopher JCH, and Peter Dayan. "Q-learning." Machine learning 8.3-4 (1992): 279-
292.
[18] Wiens, Jenna, et al. "To crash or not to crash: A quantitative look at the relationship between
offensive rebounding and transition defense in the NBA." Proceedings of the 6th Annual MIT Sloan
Sports Analytics Conference. MIT, Boston, MA. 2013.




                                                                       2018 Research Papers Competition
                                                                                Presented by:

                                                 12
