November 12, 2018                              .     Football˙HEAD




                                                   . 2018, 1–21




                                                   Risk-Neutral Pricing and Hedging of In-Play
                                                   Football Bets
   arXiv:1811.03931v1 [q-fin.TR] 29 Oct 2018




                                                   Peter Divos∗† , Sebastian del Bano Rollin‡ , Zsolt Bihari§ & Tomaso Aste∗†
                                                   ∗ Department of Computer Science, University College London, Gower Street, London W1C 6BT, United
                                                   Kingdom, † Systemic Risk Centre, London School of Economics and Political Sciences, London WC2A
                                                   2AE, United Kingdom, ‡ School of Mathematical Sciences, Queen Mary University of London, Mile End
                                                   Road, London E1 4NS, United Kingdom § Department of Finance, Corvinus University of Budapest, 1093
                                                   Budapest, Fovam ter 8, Hungary


                                                   (.)

                                                   Abstract A risk-neutral valuation framework is developed for pricing and hedging in-play football
                                                   bets based on modelling scores by independent Poisson processes with constant intensities. The
                                                   Fundamental Theorems of Asset Pricing are applied to this set-up which enables us to derive novel
                                                   arbitrage-free valuation formulæ for contracts currently traded in the market. We also describe how
                                                   to calibrate the model to the market and how trades can be replicated and hedged.

                                                   Key Words: Asset pricing, hedging, football, betting



                                                   1.    Introduction

                                                   In-play football bets are traded live during a football game. The prices of these bets
                                                   are driven by the goals scored in the underlying game in a way such that prices move
                                                   smoothly between goals and jump to a new level at times when goals are scored.
                                                   This is similar to financial markets where the price of an option changes according
                                                   to the price changes of the underlying instrument. We show that the Fundamental
                                                   Theorems of Asset Pricing can be applied to the in-play football betting market
                                                   and that these bets can be priced in the risk-neutral framework.
                                                     Distribution of final scores of football games has been studied by several authors.
                                                   In particular, Maher (1982) found that an independent Poisson distribution gives
                                                   a reasonably accurate description of football scores and achieved further improve-
                                                   ments by applying a bivariate Poisson distribution. This was further developed by
                                                   Dixon and Coles (1997) who proposed a model in which the final scores of the two
                                                   teams are not independent, but the marginal distributions of each team’s scores still
                                                   follow standard Poisson distributions.
                                                     Distribution of in-play goal times has been studied by Dixon and Robinson (1998)
                                                   who applied a state-dependent Poisson model where the goal intensities of the teams
                                                   depend on the current score and time. The model also accounts for other factors
                                                   such as home effect and injury time. The standard Poisson model has been applied

                                                   Correspondence Address: Department of Computer Science, University College London, Gower Street, Lon-
                                                   don W1C 6BT, United Kingdom
November 12, 2018   .    Football˙HEAD




                        by Fitt, Howls, and Kabelka (2005) to develop analytical valuation formulae for
                        in-play spread bets on goals and also on corners. A stochastic intensity model has
                        been suggested by Jottreau (2009) where the goals are driven by Poisson processes
                        with intensities that are stochastic, in particular driven by a Cox-Ingerson-Ross
                        process. Vecer, Kopriva, and Ichiba (2009) have shown that in-play football bets
                        may have additional sensitivities on the top of the standard Poisson model, for
                        instance sensitivities to red cards.
                           The Fundamental Theorems of Asset Pricing form the basis of the risk-neutral
                        framework of financial mathematics and derivative pricing and have been developed
                        by several authors, including Cox and Ross (1976), Harrison and Kreps (1979),
                        Harrison and Pliska (1981), Harrison and Pliska (1983), Huang (1985), Duffie (1988)
                        and Back and Pliska (1991). The first fundamental theorem states that a market
                        is arbitrage free if and only if there exists a probability measure under which the
                        underlying asset prices are martingales. The second fundamental theorem states that
                        the market is complete, (that is, any derivative product of the underlying assets can
                        be dynamically replicated) if and only if the martingale measure is unique.
                           In this paper we use independent standard time-homogeneous Poisson processes
                        to model the scores of the two teams. We construct a market of three underlying
                        assets and show that within this model a unique martingale measure exists and
                        therefore the market of in-play football bets is arbitrage-free and complete. Then
                        we demonstrate calibration and replication performance using market data.
                           The structure of this paper is the following. Section 2 contains a general overview
                        of in-play football betting and an overview of the data set. Section 3 defines the
                        formal model and contains pricing formulae for Arrow-Debreu securities among
                        others. In Section 4 we calibrate the model to historical market quotes of in-play
                        bets and in Section 5 we use the same data to show that Next Goal bets are natural
                        hedging instruments that can be used to build a replicating portfolio to match
                        the values of other bets, in particular the liquidly traded Match Odds bets. The
                        Appendix reports analytical pricing formulae for some of the most liquidly traded
                        bets.


                        2.   In-Play Football Betting

                        In traditional football betting, also known as pre-game or fixed odds betting, bets
                        are placed before the beginning of the game. In-play football betting enables bettors
                        to place bets on the outcome of a game after it started. The main difference is
                        that during in-play betting, as the game progresses and as the teams score goals,
                        the chances of certain outcomes jump to new levels and so do the odds of the
                        bets. Prices move smoothly between goals and jump once a goal is scored. In-
                        play betting became increasingly popular in recent years. For instance, Compliance
                        (2013) recently reported that for one particular bookmaker (Unibet) in-play betting
                        revenues exceeded pre-game betting revenues by 2013Q2 as shown in Figure 1.
                          There are two main styles of in-play betting: odds betting and spread betting.
                        In odds betting, the events offered are similar to digital options in the sense that
                        the bettor wins a certain amount if the event happens and loses a certain amount
                        otherwise. Typical odds bets are whether one team wins the game, whether the total
                        number of goals is above a certain number or whether the next goal is scored by
                        the home team. In spread betting, the bets offered are such that the bettor can win
                        or lose an arbitrary amount. A typical example is a bet called “total goal minutes”

                                                                  2
November 12, 2018   .    Football˙HEAD




                        Figure 1. Revenue distribution of one particular bookmaker’s (Unibet) football betting revenues between
                        In-Play and Pre-Game football betting.



                        which pays the bettor the sum of the minute time of each goal. In this paper we
                        focus on odds betting, but most of the results can also be applied to spread betting.
                        A study of spread betting containing analytical pricing formulae for various spread
                        bets was published by Fitt, Howls, and Kabelka (2005).
                          In-play betting offers various types of events such as total goals, home and away
                        goals, individual player goals, cards, corners, injuries and other events. This paper
                        focuses on bets related to goal events only.
                          Throughout the paper we refer to the value Xt of a bet as the price at which
                        the bet can be bought or sold at time t assuming that the bet pays a fixed amount
                        of 1 unit in case it wins and zero otherwise. This is a convenient notation from a
                        mathematical point of view, however it is worth noting that different conventions
                        are used for indicating prices in betting markets. The two most popular conventions
                        are called fractional odds and decimal odds. Both of these conventions rely on the
                        assumption that the bettor wagers a fixed stake when the bet is placed and enjoys
                        a payoff in case the bet wins or no payoff in case it loses. Fractional odds is the net
                        payoff of the bet in case the bet wins (that is, payoff minus stake), divided by the
                        stake. Decimal odds is the total payoff of the bet in case the bet wins, divided by
                        the stake. Therefore, the value of a bet Xt is always equal to the reciprocal of the
                        decimal odds which is equal to the reciprocal of fractional odds plus one, formally:

                                                                1               1
                                                     Xt =              =                  ,                                (1)
                                                             Decimal t   Fractional t + 1

                        where Decimal t denotes decimal and Fractional t denotes fractional odds. Most of
                        the market data we used was originally represented as decimal odds, but they were
                        converted to bet values using the above formula for all the figures and for the


                                                                          3
November 12, 2018   .    Football˙HEAD




                        underlying calculations in this paper.
                          It is also worth noting that bets can be bought or sold freely during the game.
                        This includes going short which is referred to as lay betting. Mathematically this
                        means that the amount held can be a negative number.
                          In-play bets can be purchased from retail bookmakers at a price offered by the
                        bookmaker, but can also be traded on centralized marketplaces where the exchange
                        merely matches orders of participants trading with each other through a limit order
                        book and keeps a deposit from each party to cover potential losses.


                        2.1 An example game
                        In order to demonstrate our results we selected the Portugal vs. Netherlands game
                        from the UEFA Euro 2012 Championship which was played on the 22nd of June
                        2012. The reason for selecting this particular game is that the game had a rather
                        complex unfolding with Netherlands scoring the first goal, but then Portugal taking
                        the lead in the second half and finally winning the game. This made the odds jump
                        several times during the game which makes it a good candidate for demonstrating
                        how the model performs in an extreme situation. The number of goals as a function
                        of game time is shown in Figure 2.
                           Figures 3 and 4 show market values of two bet types traded on a betting market
                        called Betfair: Match Odds and Over-Under. Match Odds contains three bets: home
                        team winning the game, away team winning the game and the draw. Over-Under
                        contains bets on the total number of goals where Under X.5 is a bet that pays off
                        if the total number of goals is equal or less than X. The dashed lines show the best
                        buy and sell offers on the market while the continuous lines show the calibrated
                        model values (see Section 4).
                           In case of Match Odds, the value of the bet for Netherlands winning the game
                        jumped after Netherlands scored the first goal. When the scores became even after
                        Portugal scored a goal, the value of the Draw bet jumped up and when Portugal
                        took the lead by scoring the third goal, the value of the bet for Portugal winning the
                        game jumped up. Finally, by the end of the game the value of the bet for Portugal
                        winning the game converged to 1 and the value of the other bets went to zero.
                           In case of the Over-Under bets, trading ceased for the Under 0.5 bet after the first
                        goal when the value of this bet jumped to zero. By the end of the game, the value
                        of the Under 3.5, 4.5, 5.5, 6.5 and 7.5 bets reached 1 because the total number of
                        goals was actually 3 and the values of the Under 0.5, 1.5 and 2.5 bets went to zero.


                        3.   Mathematical framework

                        In this section we present a risk-neutral valuation framework for in-play football
                        betting. To do so we follow the financial mathematical approach, in which we start
                        by assuming a probability space, then identify a market of underlying tradable
                        assets and postulate a model for the dynamics of these assets. We show that the
                        first and second fundamental theorems of asset pricing apply to this market, that is
                        the market is arbitrage-free and complete which means that all derivatives can be
                        replicated by taking a dynamic position in the underlying assets.
                           In classical finance, the distinction between the underlying asset (for example a
                        stock) and a derivative (for example an option on the stock) is natural. This is not
                        the case in football betting; there is no such clear distinction between underlying

                                                                  4
November 12, 2018   .    Football˙HEAD




                        Figure 2. Scores of the two teams during the Portugal vs. Netherlands game on the 22nd of June, 2012.
                        The half time result was 1-1 and the final result was a 2-1 win for Portugal.



                        and derivative assets because all bets are made on the scores, and the score process
                        itself is not a tradable asset. In order to be able to apply the Fundamental Theorems
                        of Asset Pricing we need to artificially introduce underlying assets and define the
                        model by postulating a price dynamics for these assets in the physical measure. It is
                        also desirable to chose underlying assets that have a simple enough price dynamics
                        so that developing the replicating portfolio becomes as straightforward as possible.
                        For these reasons, the two underlying assets of our choice are assets that at the
                        end of the game pay out the number of goals scored by the home and away teams,
                        respectively. It is important to note that these assets are not traded in practice
                        and the choice therefore seems unnatural. However, these underlying assets can be
                        statically replicated from Arrow-Debreu securities that are referred to as Correct
                        Score bets in football betting and are traded in practice. Furthermore, towards the
                        end of the Section 3.2 we arrive at Proposition 3.12 which states that any two
                        linearly independent bets can be used as hedging instruments. Therefore the choice
                        of the underlying assets is practically irrelevant and only serves a technical purpose.
                        This result is applied in Section 5 where Next Goal bets are used as natural hedging
                        instruments.


                        3.1 Setup
                        Let us consider a probability space (Ω, F, P) that carries two independent Poisson
                        processes Nt1 , Nt2 with respective intensities µ1 , µ2 and the filtration (Ft )t∈[0,T ]
                        generated by these processes. Let time t = 0 denote the beginning and t = T the
                        end of the game. The Poisson processes represent the number of goals scored by

                                                                         5
November 12, 2018   .     Football˙HEAD




                        Figure 3. Values of the three Match Odds bets during the game: Draw (black), Portugal Win (red),
                        Netherlands Win (blue). Dashed lines represent the best market buy and sell offers while the continuous
                        lines represent the calibrated model values. Note that the value of the Netherlands Win bet jumps up after
                        the first goal because the chance for Netherlands winning the game suddenly increased. It jumped down for
                        similar reasons when Portugal scored it’s first goal and at the same time the value of the Portugal Win and
                        Draw bets jumped up. By the end of the game, because Portugal actually won the game, the value of the
                        Portugal Win bet reached 1 while both other bets became worthless.



                        the teams, the superscript 1 refers to the home and 2 refers to the away team. This
                        notation is used throughout, the distinction between superscripts and exponents
                        will always be clear from the context. The probability measure P is the real-world
                        or physical probability measure.
                          We assume that there exists a liquid market where three assets can be traded
                        continuously with no transaction costs or any restrictions on short selling or bor-
                        rowing. The first asset Bt is a risk-free bond that bears no interests, an assumption
                        that is motivated by the relatively short time frame of a football game. The second
                        and third assets St1 and St2 are such that their values at the end of the game are
                        equal to the number of goals scored by the home and away teams, respectively.

                          Definition 3.1 (model). The model is defined by the following price dynamics of
                        the assets:

                                                             Bt = 1
                                                             St1 = Nt1 + λ1 (T − t)                                            (2)
                                                             St2 = Nt2 + λ2 (T − t)

                        where λ1 and λ2 are known real constants.

                          Essentially, the underlying asset prices are compensated Poisson processes, but the


                                                                            6
November 12, 2018   .     Football˙HEAD




                        Figure 4. Values of Over/Under bets during the game. Under X.5 is a bet that pays off in case the total
                        number of goals by the end of the game is below or equal to X. Marked lines represent the calibrated model
                        prices while the grey bands show the best market buy and sell offers. Note that after the first goal trading
                        in the Under 0.5 bet ceased and it became worthless. By the end of the game when the total number of
                        goals was 3, all the bets up until Under 2.5 became worthless while the Under 3.5 and higher bets reached
                        a value of 1.


                        compensators λ1 , λ2 are not necessarily equal to the intensities µ1 , µ2 and therefore
                        the prices are not necessarilty martingales in the physical measure P. This is similar
                        to the Black-Scholes model where the stock’s drift in the physical measure is not
                        necessarily equal to the risk-free rate.
                          We are now closely following Harrison and Pliska (1981) in defining the necessary
                        concepts.


                        3.2 Risk-neutral pricing of bets
                          Definition 3.2 (trading strategy).      A trading strategy is an Ft -predictable vec-
                                                                       Rt
                        tor process φt = φ0t , φ1t , φ2t that satisfies 0 φis ds < ∞ for i ∈ {0, 1, 2}. The
                                                        
                        associated value process is denoted by

                                                            Vtφ = φ0t Bt + φ1t St1 + φ2t St2 .                                  (3)

                        The trading strategy is self-financing if
                                                                       Z t                Z t
                                                       Vtφ = V0φ +           φ1s dSs1 +         φ2s dSs2 .                      (4)
                                                                        0                  0
                               Rt
                        where 0 φis dSsi , i ∈ {1, 2} is a Lebesgue Stieltjes integral which is well defined
                        according to Proposition 2.3.2 on p17 of Brémaud (1981).

                                                                              7
November 12, 2018   .    Football˙HEAD




                           Definition 3.3 (arbitrage-freeness). The model his arbitrage-free
                                                                                          i if no self-
                                                                              φ     φ
                        financing trading strategy φt exist such that P Vt − V0 ≥ 0          = 1 and
                          h             i
                        P Vtφ − V0φ > 0 > 0.

                           Definition 3.4 (bet). A bet (also referred to as a contingent claim or derivative)
                        is an FT -measurable random variable XT .

                          In practical terms this means that the value of a bet is revealed at the end of the
                        game.

                          Definition 3.5 (completeness). The model is complete if for every bet XT there
                        exists a self-financing trading strategy φt such that XT = VTφ . In this case we say
                        that the bet XT is replicated by the trading strategy φt .

                          Theorem 3.6 (risk-neutral measure). There exists a probability measure Q re-
                        ferred to as the risk-neutral equivalent martingale measure such that:
                        (a) The asset processes Bt , St1 , St2 are Q-martingales.
                        (b) The goal processes Nt1 and Nt2 in measure Q are standard Poisson processes
                            with intensities λ1 and λ2 respectively (which are in general different from the
                            P-intensities of µ1 and µ2 ).
                        (c) Q is an equivalent measure to P, that is the set of events having zero probability
                            is the same for both measures.
                        (d) Q is unique.

                        Proof. The proof relies on Girsanov’s theorem for point processes (see Theorem 2
                        on p.165 and Theorem 3 on page 166 in Brémaud (1981)) which states that Nt1 and
                        Nt2 are Poisson processes with intensities λ1 and λ2 under the probability measure
                        Q which is defined by the Radon-Nikodym-derivative

                                                               dQ
                                                                  = Lt ,                                  (5)
                                                               dP
                        where
                                                        2     i
                                                        Y   λi Nt
                                                 Lt =                  exp [(µi − λi ) t] .               (6)
                                                              µi
                                                        i=1

                        Then uniqueness follows from Theorem 8 on p.64 in Brémaud (1981) which states
                        that if two measures have the same set of intensities, then the two measures must
                        coincide. The Integration Theorem on p.27 of Brémaud (1981) states that Nti − λi t
                        are Q-martingales, therefore the assets Sti are also Q-martingales for i ∈ {1, 2}.
                        Proposition 9.5 of Tankov (2004) claims that P and Q are equivalent probability
                        measures. The process of the bond asset Bt is a trivial martingale in every measure
                        because it’s a deterministic constant which therefore doesn’t depend on the measure.


                          Remark 3.7. Changing the measure of a Poisson process changes the intensity and
                        leaves the drift unchanged. This is in contrast with the case of a Wiener process
                        where change of measure changes the drift and leaves the volatility unchanged.



                                                                   8
November 12, 2018   .    Football˙HEAD




                          Theorem 3.8. (arbitrage-free) The model is arbitrage-free and complete.

                        Proof. This follows directly from the first and second fundamental theorems of fi-
                        nance. To be more specific, arbitrage-freeness follows from theorem 1.1 of Delbaen
                        and Schachermayer (1994) which states that the existence of a risk-neutral mea-
                        sure implies a so-called condition “no free lunch with vanishing risk” which implies
                        arbitrage-freeness. Completeness follows from theorem 3.36 of Harrison and Pliska
                        (1981) which states that the model is complete if the risk-neutral measure is unique.
                        Alternatively it also follows from theorem 3.35 which states that the model is com-
                        plete if the martingale representation theorem holds for all martingales which is the
                        case according to Theorem 17, p.76 of Brémaud (1981).

                          Corollary 3.9. The time-t value of a bet is equal to the risk-neutral expectation
                        of it’s value at the end of the game, formally:

                                                          Xt = EQ [XT |Ft ] .                                  (7)

                        Proof. This follows directly from Proposition 3.31 of Harrison and Pliska (1981).

                          Corollary 3.10. The time-t value of a bet is also equal to the value of the associ-
                        ated self-financing trading strategy φt , formally:
                                                                    Z t                   Z t
                                              Xt = Vtφ = V0φ +            φ1s dSs1 +             φ2s dSs2 .    (8)
                                                                     0                       0

                        Proof. This follows directly from Proposition 3.32 of Harrison and Pliska (1981).

                           Definition 3.11 (linear independence). The bets ZT1 and ZT2  are linearly in-
                        dependent if the self-financing trading strategy φ1t = φ10     11 12 that replicates
                                                                                  t , φt , φt
                        ZT1 is P-almost surely
                                              linearly independent from the self-financing trading strategy
                        φ2t = φ20     21 22 that replicates Z 2 . Formally, at any time t ∈ [0, T ] and for any
                                 t , φt , φt                  T
                        constants c1 , c2 ∈ R

                                                         c1 φ1t 6= c2 φ2t P a.s.                               (9)

                          Proposition 3.12 (replication). Any bet XT can be replicated by taking a dynamic
                        position in any two linearly independent bets ZT1 and ZT2 , formally:
                                                             Z t                    Z t
                                                 Xt = X0 +          ψs1 dZs1 +            ψs2 dZs2 ,          (10)
                                                                0                    0

                        where the weights ψt1 , ψt2 are equal to the solution of the following equation:

                                                      φ11 φ12             ψt1                φ1t
                                                                                              
                                                       t   t                        =                         (11)
                                                      φ21
                                                       t  φ22
                                                           t              ψt2                φ2t

                        where φ11     12    21 22 and φ1 , φ2 are the components of the trading strat-
                                                                
                                 t , φt , φt , φt          t    t                        Rt
                        egy that replicates ZT1 , ZT2 and XT , respectively. The integral 0 ψs1 dZs1 is to be




                                                                      9
November 12, 2018   .    Football˙HEAD




                        interpreted in the following sense:
                                                   Z t                Z t                  Z t
                                                         ψs1 dZs1 =         ψs1 φ11  1
                                                                                 s dSs +           ψs1 φ12  2
                                                                                                        s dSs        (12)
                                                     0                 0                       0
                                             Rt  2   2
                        and similarly for     0 ψs dZs .

                        Proof. Substituting dZt1 = φ11    1   21    2   2    12  1    22  2
                                                     t dSt + φt dSt , dZt = φt dSt + φt dSt and Equation
                        8 into Equation 10 verifies the proposition.


                        3.3 European bets
                          Definition 3.13 (European bet). A European bet is a bet with a value depending
                        only on the final number of goals NT1 , NT2 , that is one of the form

                                                                  XT = Π NT1 , NT2
                                                                                           
                                                                                                                     (13)

                        where Π is a known scalar function N × N → R which is referred to as the payoff
                        function.

                           Example 3.14. A typical example is a bet that pays out 1 if the home team
                        scores more goals than the away team       (home wins) and pays nothing otherwise,
                        that is Π NT1 , NT2 = 1 NT1 > NT2 where the function 1 (A) takes the value of 1
                                                              
                        if A is true and zero otherwise. Another example is a bet that pays out 1 if the
                        total number of goals is strictly higher than 2 and pays nothing otherwise, that is
                        Π NT , NT = 1 NT + NT2 > 2 .
                              1   2         1


                          Proposition 3.15 (pricing formula). The time-t value of a European bet with
                        payoff function Π is given by the explicit formula
                                 ∞
                                 X       ∞
                                         X
                                                  Π (n1 , n2 ) P n1 − Nt1 , λ1 (T − t) P n2 − Nt2 , λ2 (T − t) , (14)
                                                                                                             
                         Xt =
                                n1 =N1t n2 =N2t

                                                                                                                −Λ
                        where P (N, Λ) is the Poisson probability, that is P (N, Λ) = eN ! ΛN if N ≥ 0 and
                        P (N, Λ) = 0 otherwise.

                        Proof. This follows directly form Proposition 3.9 and Definition 3.13.

                          As we have seen, the price
                                                    of a European bet is a function of the time t and the
                                             1   2
                        number of goals Nt , Nt and intensities (λ1 , λ2 ). Therefore, from now    on we will
                        denote this function by Xt = Xt Nt1 , Nt2 or Xt = Xt t, Nt1 , Nt2 , λ1 , λ2 , depending
                        on whether the context requires the explicit dependence on intensities or not.
                          It is important to note that Arrow-Debreu bets do exist in in-play football betting
                        and are referred to as Correct Score bets.

                          Definition 3.16 (Arrow-Debreu bets). Arrow-Debreu bets, also known as Cor-
                        rect Score bets are European bets with a payoff function ΠAD(K1 ,K2 ) equal to 1 if
                        the final score NT1 , NT2 is equal to a specified result (K1 , K2 ) and 0 otherwise:
                                                 


                                                     ΠAD(K1 ,K2 ) = 1 NT1 = K1 , NT2 = K2
                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                     (15)

                                                                               10
November 12, 2018   .    Football˙HEAD




                          According to the following proposition, Arrow-Debreu bets can be used to stati-
                        cally replicate any European bet:

                          Proposition 3.17 (static replication). The time-t value of a European bet with
                        payoff function Π in terms of time-t values of Arrow-Debreu bets is given by:
                                                          ∞
                                                          X       ∞
                                                                  X
                                             Xt =                         Π (K1 , K2 ) Xt,AD(K1 ,K2 ) ,       (16)
                                                              t       t
                                                         K1 =N K2 =N
                                                              1       2



                        where Xt,AD(K1 ,K2 ) denotes the time-t value of an Arrow-Debreu bet that pays out
                        if the final scores are equal to (K1 , K2 ).

                        Proof. This follows directly form Proposition 3.15 and Definition 3.16.

                          Let us now define the partial derivatives of the bet values with respect to change
                        in time and the number goals scored. These are required for hedging and serve the
                        same purpose as the greeks in the Black-Scholes framework.

                          Definition 3.18 (Greeks). The greeks are the values of the following forward dif-
                        ference operators (δ1 , δ2 ) and partial derivative operator applied to the bet value:

                                   δ1 Xt Nt1 , Nt2  = Xt Nt1 + 1, Nt2 − Xt Nt1 , Nt2
                                                                                   
                                                                                                              (17)
                                   δ2 Xt Nt1 , Nt2 = Xt Nt1 , Nt2 + 1 − Xt Nt1 , Nt2
                                                                                   
                                                                                                              (18)
                                                           1 
                                   ∂t Xt Nt1 , Nt2 = lim      Xt+dt Nt1 , Nt2 − Xt Nt1 , Nt2
                                                                                           
                                                                                                              (19)
                                                      dt→0 dt

                          Remark. The forward difference operators δ1 , δ2 play the role of Delta and the
                        partial derivative operator ∂t plays the role of Theta in the Black-Scholes framework.

                          Theorem 3.19    (Kolmogorov forward equation). The value of a European bet
                        X t, Nt1 , Nt2 with a payoff function Π(NT1 , NT2 ) satisfies the following Feynman-Kac
                                      
                        representation on the time interval t ∈ [0, T ] which is also known as the Kolmogorov
                        forward equation:

                                  ∂t X t, Nt1 , Nt2        = −λ1 δ1 X t, Nt1 , Nt2 − λ2 δ2 X t, Nt1 , Nt2
                                                                                                        
                                                                                                              (20)

                        with boundary condition:

                                                      XT T, NT1 , NT2 = Π NT1 , NT2 .
                                                                                  


                        Proof. The proposition can be easily verified using the closed form formula from
                        Proposition 3.15. Furthermore, several proofs are available in the literature, see for
                        example Proposition 12.6 in Tankov (2004), Theorem 6.2 in Ross (2006) or Equation
                        13 in Feller (1940).

                          Remark 3.20. Equation 20 also has the consequence that any portfolio of Euro-
                        pean bets that changes no value if either team scores a goal (Delta-neutral) does
                        not change value between goals either (Theta-neutral). We note without a proof,
                        that this holds for all bets in general.




                                                                            11
November 12, 2018   .    Football˙HEAD




                          Corollary 3.21. The value of a European bet X t, Nt1 , Nt2 , λ1 , λ2 satisfies the
                                                                                              
                        following:

                                                               ∂
                                                                  Xt = (T − t) δi Xt                                                       (21)
                                                              ∂λi

                        where i ∈ {1, 2}.

                        Proof. This follows directly from Proposition 3.15.
                          Proposition 3.22 (portfolio weights). The components φ1t , φ2t of the trading
                                                                                        
                        strategy that replicates a European bet XT are equal to the forward difference
                        operators (δ1 , δ2 ) of the bet, formally:

                                                             φ1t = δ1 X t, Nt1 , Nt2
                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                           (22)
                                                             φ2t                       t, Nt1 , Nt2
                                                                                                             
                                                                       = δ2 X                                    .                         (23)

                        Proof. Recall that
                                      P according
                                           Rt         to Proposition 3.10, the time-t value of a bet is equal
                        to Xt = X0 + 2i=1 0 φis dSsi , which after substituting dSti = dNti − λi dt becomes
                                                                                Z t
                                                                                       φ1s λ1 + φ2s λ2 ds
                                                                                                      
                                                      Xt = X0 +
                                                                                 0
                                                                          Nt1              Nt  2
                                                                         X                 X
                                                                     +          φ1t1k +            φ2t2k ,                                 (24)
                                                                         k=0               k=0

                                          Rt           PNti i
                        where we used 0 φis dNsi = k=0       φt1 where 0 ≤ tik ≤ t is the time of the k.th jump
                                                               k

                        (goal) of the process Nti for i ∈ {1, 2}.
                           On the other hand, using Ito’s formula for jump processes (Proposition 8.15,
                        Tankov (2004)), which applies because the closed form formula in Proposition 3.15
                        is infinitely differentiable, the value of a European bet is equal to
                                                      Z t
                                                            ∂s X s, Ns1 , Ns2 ds
                                                                             
                                  Xt = X0 +
                                                       0
                                                Nt1                                              Nt 2
                                                                                                                                     
                                                X                                                  X
                                            +         δ1 X       t1k , Nt11k − , Nt21k −       +          δ2 X t2k , Nt12k − , Nt22k − ,   (25)
                                                k=0                                                k=0


                        where tik − refers to the fact that the value of the processes is to be taken before the
                        jump.
                          Because the equality between Equations 24 and 25 hold for every possible jump
                        times, the terms behind the sums are equal which proves the proposition.


                        4.   Model Calibration

                        In this section we discuss how to calibrate the model parameters to historical market
                        prices. We demonstrate that a unique equivalent martingale measure Q exists, that
                        is, a set of intensities λ1 , λ2 exist that are consistent with the prices of all bets
                        observed on the market (see Propositions 3.6 and 3.8).

                                                                                  12
November 12, 2018   .    Football˙HEAD




                          We apply a least squares approach in which we consider market prices of a set
                        of bets and find model intensities that deliver model prices for these bets that are
                        as close as possible to the market prices. Specifically, we minimize the sum of the
                        square of the weighted differences between the model and market mid prices as a
                        function of model intensities, using market bid-ask spreads as weights. The reason
                        for choosing a bid-ask spread weighting is that we would like to take into account
                        bets with a lower bid-ask spread with a higher weight because the price of these
                        bets is assumed to be more certain. Formally, we minimize the following expression:

                                                    v
                                                    u
                                                        n
                                                          
                                                              i,MID      i  1  2    1    2
                                                                                            2
                                                  u1       X       − Xt λt , λt , Nt , Nt
                                                    u   X
                                      R λ1t , λ2t = t      t                               ,          (26)
                                                      n         1
                                                                   X i,SELL
                                                                            −X i,BUY
                                                         i=1      2    t          t


                        where n is the total number of bets used, Xti,BUY and Xti,SELL are the best market
                        buy and sell quotes of the i.th type of bet at time t, Xti,MID is the market
                                                                                                    mid price
                                                                                 i   1   2   1   2
                        which is the average of the best buy and sell quotes, Xt Nt , Nt , λt , λt is the model
                        price of the i.th bet at time t, given the current number of goals Nt1 , Nt2 and model
                        intensity parameters λ1t , λ2t , see Proposition 3.15. This minimization procedure is
                        referred to as model calibration.
                           Calibration has been performed using a time step of 1 minute during the game,
                        independently at each time step. We used the three most liquid groups of bets which
                        in our case were Match Odds, Over / Under and Correct Score with a total of 31
                        bet types in these three categories. Appendix A describes these bet types in detail.
                           The continuous lines in Figures 3 and 4 show the calibrated model prices while
                        the dashed lines are the market buy and sell offers. It can be seen that the calibrated
                        values are close to the market quotes, although they are not always within the bid-
                        ask spread. As the measures of the goodness of the fit we use the optimal value of
                        the cost function of Equation 26, which is the average distance of the calibrated
                        values from the market mid prices in units of bid-ask spread, the calibration error
                        is shown in Figure 5. We performed calibration for multiple games of the Euro 2012
                        Championship, the time average of the calibration errors for each game is shown in
                        Table 1. The mean and standard deviation of the calibration errors across games
                        is 1.57 ± 0.27 which is to be interpreted in units of bid-ask spread because of the
                        weighting of the error function in Equation 26. This means, that on average, the
                        calibrated values are outside of the bid-ask spread, but not significantly. Given that
                        a model of only 2 parameters has been calibrated to a total of 31 independent
                        market quotes, this is a reasonably good result.
                           Finally, the implied intensities, along with the estimated uncertainties of the cal-
                        ibration using the bid-ask spreads are shown in Figure 6. Contrary to our initial
                        assumption of constant intensities, the actual intensities fluctuate over time and
                        there also seems to be an increasing trend in the implied goal intensities of both
                        teams.
                           In order to better understand the nature of the implied intensity process, we
                        estimated the drift and volatility of the log total intensity, that is we assumed the
                        following:

                                                    d ln λ1t + λ2t = µdt + σdWt
                                                                  
                                                                                                          (27)



                                                                  13
November 12, 2018   .     Football˙HEAD




                        Figure 5. Calibration error during the game. Calibration error is defined as the average distance of all
                        31 calibrated bet values from the market mid prices in units of bid-ask spread. A formal definition is given
                        by Equation 26. Note that the calibration error for this particular game is usually between 1 and 2 bid-ask
                        spreads which is a reasonably good result, given that the model has only 2 free parameters to explain all
                        31 bet values.


                        where µ and σ are the drift and volatility of the process. Table 2 shows the results
                        of the estimation for multiple games. The mean and standard deviation of the drift
                        terms are µ = 0.55 ± 0.16 1/90min while
                                                             √     the mean and standard deviation of the
                        volatility terms are σ = 0.51±0.19 1/ 90min. The fact that implied goal intensities
                        are increasing during the game is consistent with findings of Dixon and Robinson
                        (1998) who found gradual increase of scoring rates by analysing goal times of 4012
                        matches between 1993 and 1996.


                        5.    Hedging with Next Goal bets

                        In this section we demonstrate market completeness and we show that Next Goal
                        bets are natural hedging instruments that can be used to dynamically replicate and
                        hedge other bets.
                          Recall that according to Proposition 3.12 any European bet Xt can be replicated
                        by dynamically trading in two linearly independent instruments Zt1 and Zt2 :
                                                                      Z t                Z t
                                                       Xt = X0 +            ψs1 dZs1 +         ψs2 dZs2                       (28)
                                                                        0                 0




                                                                             14
November 12, 2018   .     Football˙HEAD




                        Figure 6. Calibrated model parameters, also referred to as implied intensities during the game. Formally,
                        this is equal to the minimizer λ1t , λ2t of Equation 26. The bands show the parameter uncertainties estimated
                        from the bid-ask spreads of the market values of the bets. Note that the intensities appear to have an
                        increasing trend and also fluctuate over time.

                                               Game                                  Calibration Error
                                               Denmark v Germany                            1.65
                                               Portugal v Netherlands                       1.18
                                               Spain v Italy                                2.21
                                               Sweden v England                             1.58
                                               Italy v Croatia                              1.45
                                               Germany v Italy                              1.50
                                               Germany v Greece                             1.34
                                               Netherlands v Germany                        1.78
                                               Spain v Rep of Ireland                       1.64
                                               Spain v France                               1.40
                                               Average                                      1.57
                                               Standard deviation                           0.27
                        Table 1. Average calibration errors in units of bid-ask spread as shown in Figure 5 have been calculated
                        for multiple games of the UEFA Euro 2012 Championship and are shown in this table. Note that the mean
                        of the averages is just 1.57 bid-ask spreads with a standard deviation of 0.27 which shows that the model
                        fit is reasonably good for the games analysed.



                        where the portfolio weights ψt1 , ψt2 are equal to the solution of the equation

                                                        δ1 Zt1 δ1 Zt2          ψt1
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                 δ1 Xt
                                                                                         =                   ,                 (29)
                                                        δ2 Zt1 δ2 Zt2          ψt2               δ2 Xt

                        where the values of the finite difference operators δ (Definition 3.18) can be com-

                                                                            15
November 12, 2018   .     Football˙HEAD




                                                                                                       √
                                     Game                              Drift [1/90min]          Vol [1/ 90min]
                                     Denmark v Germany                       0.36                     0.28
                                     Portugal v Netherlands                  0.49                     0.44
                                     Spain v Italy                           0.60                     0.76
                                     Sweden v England                        0.58                     0.59
                                     Italy v Croatia                         0.82                     0.60
                                     Germany v Italy                         0.76                     0.39
                                     Germany v Greece                        0.65                     0.66
                                     Netherlands v Germany                   0.43                     0.32
                                     Spain v Rep of Ireland                  0.32                     0.78
                                     Spain v France                          0.48                     0.25
                                     Average                                 0.55                     0.51
                                     Standard deviation                      0.16                     0.19
                        Table 2. Average drift and volatility of total log-intensities estimated for multiple games of the UEFA
                        Euro 2012 Championship. Note that the drift term is positive for all games which is consistent with the
                        empirical observation of increasing goal frequencies as the game progresses.




                        Figure 7. Replicating the Match Odds home, away and draw contracts using Next Goal home and away
                        contracts as hedging instruments. The left column shows the replication performance with the dashed line
                        showing the value of the original Match Odds contracts and the continuous line showing the value of the
                        replicating portfolio. The right column shows the weights of the replicating portfolio with the dashed line
                        showing the weight of the Next Goal home contract and the dotted line showing the weight of the Next
                        Goal away contract.



                        puted using Proposition 3.15 using the calibrated model intensities. Equation 29
                        tells us that the change in the replicating portfolio must match the change of the
                        bet value Xt in case either team scores a goal. This approach is analogous to delta
                        hedging in the Black Scholes framework.
                          The two bets that we use as replicating instruments are the Next Goal home and
                        the Next Goal away bets. These bets settle during the game in a way such that


                                                                            16
November 12, 2018   .    Football˙HEAD




                        when the home team scores a goal the price of the Next Goal home bet jumps to 1
                        and the price of the Next Goal away bet jumps to zero and vice versa for the away
                        team. After the goal the bets reset and trade again at their regular market price.
                        The values of the bets are:


                                                                  λ1 h                       i
                                                ZtNG1     =            1 − e−(λ1 +λ2 )(T −t)                   (30)
                                                               λ1 + λ2
                                                                  λ2 h                       i
                                                ZtNG2     =            1 − e−(λ1 +λ2 )(T −t) .                 (31)
                                                               λ1 + λ2

                          The matrix of deltas, that is the changes of contract values in case of a goal as
                        defined in 3.18 are:


                                             δ1 ZtN G1   δ1 ZtN G2               1 − ZtN G1    −ZtN G2
                                                                                                        
                                                                         =                                     (32)
                                             δ2 ZtN G1   δ2 ZtN G2                −ZtN G1     1 − ZtN G2

                           The reason for choosing Next Goal bets as hedging instruments is that these
                        bets are linearly independent (see Definition 3.11), that is the delta matrix is non-
                        singular even if there is a large goal difference between the two teams. Note that this
                        is an advantage compared to using the Match Odds bets as hedging instruments: in
                        case one team leads by several goals, it is almost certain that the team will win. In
                        that case the value of the Match Odds bets goes close to 1 for the given team and
                        0 for the other team. An additional goal does not change the values significantly,
                        therefore the delta matrix becomes singular and the bets are not suitable for hedging
                        because the portfolio weights go to infinity. This is never the case with Next Goal
                        bets which can therefore be used as natural hedging instruments.
                           We used the Portugal vs. Netherlands game from Section 2.1 to replicate the values
                        of the three Match Odds bets, using the Next Goal bets as hedging instruments.
                        Figure 7 shows the values of the original Match Odds bets along with the values of
                        the replicating portfolios (left column) and the replicating portfolio weights (right
                        column).
                           Figure 8 shows the jumps of contract values against the jumps of replicating port-
                        folio values at times when a goal was scored. This figure contains several different
                        types of bets, that is not only Match Odds bets, but also Over/Under and Cor-
                        rect Score bets. The figure also contains all 3 goals scored during the Portugal vs.
                        Netherlands game. It can be seen that the jumps of the original contract values
                        are in line with the jumps of the replicating portfolio values with a correlation of
                        89%. Table 3 shows these correlations for multiple games of the UEFA Euro 2012
                        Championship. It can be seen that the correlations are reasonably high for all games
                        with an average of 80% and a standard deviation of 19%.


                        6.   Conclusions

                        In this paper we have shown that the Fundamental Theorems of Asset Pricing apply
                        to the market of in-play football bets if the scores are assumed to follow independent
                        Poisson processes of constant intensities. We developed general formulae for pricing
                        and replication. We have shown that the model of only 2 parameters calibrates


                                                                         17
November 12, 2018   .     Football˙HEAD




                        Figure 8. Jumps of actual contract values (horizontal axis) versus jumps of replicating portfolio values
                        (vertical axis) at times of goals scored during the Portugal vs. Netherlands game. The changes are computed
                        between the last traded price before a goal and the first traded price after a goal, for all goals. The figure
                        contains Match Odds, Over/Under and Correct Score bets. Next Goal home and away bets were used
                        as hedging instruments to build the replicating portfolios. Note that the value changes of the replicating
                        portfolios corresponds reasonably well to the value changes of the original contracts with a correlation of
                        89%.

                                                   Game                                 Correlation
                                                   Denmark vs. Germany                     79%
                                                   Portugal vs. Netherlands                89%
                                                   Spain vs. Italy                         97%
                                                   Italy vs. Croatia                       47%
                                                   Spain vs. France                        86%
                                                   Germany vs. Italy                       99%
                                                   Germany vs. Greece                      60%
                                                   Netherlands vs. Germany                 93%
                                                   Spain vs. Rep of Ireland                98%
                                                   Sweden vs. England                      50%
                                                   Average                                 80%
                                                   Standard deviation                      19%
                        Table 3. Correlation between the jumps of bet values and jumps of replicating portfolios at times of goals
                        for all bets of a game.



                        to 31 different bets with an error of less than 2 bid-ask spreads. Furthermore, we
                        have shown that the model can also be used for replication and hedging. Overall
                        we obtained good agreement between actual contract values and the values of the
                        corresponding replicating portfolios, however we point out that hedging errors can
                        sometimes be significant due to the fact the implied intensities are in practice not
                        constant.

                                                                             18
November 12, 2018   .    Football˙HEAD




                        Funding

                        PD and TA acknowledge support of the Economic and Social Research Council
                        (ESRC) in funding the Systemic Risk Centre (ES/K002309/1).


                        References

                        Back, Kerry, and Stanley R Pliska. 1991. “On the fundamental theorem of asset pricing with an
                           infinite state space.” Journal of Mathematical Economics 20 (1): 1–18.
                        Brémaud, Pierre. 1981. Point processes and queues. Vol. 30. Springer, New York.
                        Compliance, Gambling. 2013. “In-Play Tracker - Summer 2013.” .
                        Cox, John C, and Stephen A Ross. 1976. “The valuation of options for alternative stochastic
                           processes.” Journal of Financial Economics 3 (1): 145–166.
                        Delbaen, Freddy, and Walter Schachermayer. 1994. “A general version of the fundamental theorem
                           of asset pricing.” Mathematische annalen 300 (1): 463–520.
                        Dixon, Mark, and Michael Robinson. 1998. “A birth process model for association football
                           matches.” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series D (The Statistician) 47 (3): 523–538.
                        Dixon, Mark J, and Stuart G Coles. 1997. “Modelling association football scores and inefficien-
                           cies in the football betting market.” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series C (Applied
                           Statistics) 46 (2): 265–280.
                        Duffie, Darrell. 1988. Security markets: Stochastic models. Vol. 19821. Academic Press New York.
                        Feller, Willy. 1940. “On the integro-differential equations of purely discontinuous Markoff pro-
                           cesses.” Transactions of the American Mathematical Society 48 (3): 488–515.
                        Fitt, AD, CJ Howls, and M Kabelka. 2005. “Valuation of soccer spread bets.” Journal of the
                           Operational Research Society 57 (8): 975–985.
                        Harrison, J Michael, and David M Kreps. 1979. “Martingales and arbitrage in multiperiod securities
                           markets.” Journal of Economic Theory 20 (3): 381–408.
                        Harrison, J Michael, and Stanley R Pliska. 1981. “Martingales and stochastic integrals in the theory
                           of continuous trading.” Stochastic processes and their applications 11 (3): 215–260.
                        Harrison, J Michael, and Stanley R Pliska. 1983. “A stochastic calculus model of continuous trading:
                           complete markets.” Stochastic processes and their applications 15 (3): 313–316.
                        Huang, Chi-Fu. 1985. “Information structure and equilibrium asset prices.” Journal of Economic
                           Theory 35 (1): 33–71.
                        Jottreau, Benoit. 2009. “How do markets play soccer?.” .
                        Maher, MJ. 1982. “Modelling association football scores.” Statistica Neerlandica 36 (3): 109–118.
                        Ross, Sheldon M. 2006. Introduction to probability models. Academic press, Massachusetts.
                        Tankov, Peter. 2004. Financial modelling with jump processes. CRC Press, London.
                        Vecer, Jan, Frantisek Kopriva, and Tomoyuki Ichiba. 2009. “Estimating the effect of the red card
                           in soccer: When to commit an offense in exchange for preventing a goal opportunity.” Journal
                           of Quantitative Analysis in Sports 5 (1).




                        Appendix A. Valuation formulae

                        This section summarizes a list of analytical formulae for the values of some of the
                        most common in-play football bets. In the first sub-section we consider European
                        bets, while the second sub-section contains non-European bets.


                        A.1 European Bets
                        The value of a European bet at the end of the game only depends on the final
                        scores. The formulae of this section follow directly from Proposition 3.15. Table A1
                        summarizes the payoff functions and the valuation formulae for some of the most

                                                                        19
November 12, 2018   .     Football˙HEAD




                                                          Payoff Π NT1 , NT2                    Value Xt Nt1 , Nt2 , λ1 , λ2
                                                                                                                             
                         Bet type
                                                                                                          Q2
                                                             1 NT1 > NT2                                       P ki − Nti , Λi
                                                                                              P                                
                         Match Odds Home                                                          k1 >k 2  i=1
                                                                                                          Q2
                                                             1 NT1 < NT2                                       P ki − Nti , Λi
                                                                                              P                                
                         Match Odds Away                                                          k1 <k 2  i=1
                                                                                                          Q2
                                                             1 NT1 = NT2                                                 i, Λ
                                                                                              P                                
                         Match Odds Draw                                                          k1Q=k2   i=1 P ki − Nt     i
                                                                                                      2
                                                         1 NT1 = K1 , NT2 = K                                          i
                                                                                
                         Arrow-Debreu K1 ,K2                                  2             P∞        i=1 P Ki − Nt , Λi
                                                           1 NT1 + NT2 > K                           P k − Nt − Nt2 , (Λ1 + Λ2 )
                                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                                                   
                         Over K                                                              k=K+1
                                                                                            PK−1
                                                           1 NT1 + NT2 < K                                     1     2
                                                                                                                                 
                         Under K                                                              k=0 P k − Nt − Nt , (Λ1 + Λ2 )
                                                        1 NT1 + NT2 = 1 mod 2
                                                                                 
                         Odd                                                                 exp [− (Λ1 + Λ2 )] cosh [(Λ1 + Λ2 )]
                         Even                           1 NT1 + NT2 = 0 mod 2                exp [− (Λ1 + Λ2 )] sinh [(Λ1 + Λ2 )]
                                                                                                                     K−Nt1 +Nt2
                                                                                              exp [− (Λ1 + Λ2 )] Λ
                                                                                                                            2
                                                                                                                     1
                                                             1 NT1 − NT2 = K
                                                                                   
                         Winning Margin K                                                                           Λ2
                                                                                                                    √      
                                                                                                  ·B|K−Nt1 +Nt2 | 2 Λ1 Λ2
                        Table A1. Valuation formulae for some of the most common types of in-play football bets. Π NT1 , NT2
                                                                                                                                  

                        denotes the payoff function, that is the value of the European bet at the end of the game. P (k, Λ) denotes
                                                                     1 −Λ k
                        the Poisson distribution, that is P (k, Λ) = k! e Λ and Λi = λi (T − t) with i ∈ {1, 2} for the home and
                        the away team, respectively.



                        common types of European bets.
                          Match Odds Home, Away and Draw bets pay out depending on the final result
                        of the game. The Arrow-Debreu K1 ,K2 bets pay out if the final scores are equal to
                        K1 ,K2 . Over K and Under K bets pay out if the total number of goals is over or
                        under K. Odd and Even bets pay out if the total number of goals is an odd or an
                        even number.
                          The Winning Margin K bet wins if the difference between the home and away
                        scores is equal to K. The value of this bet follows the Skellam distribution, Bk (z)
                        denotes the modified Bessel function of the first kind.


                        A.2 Non-European Bets
                        Bets in this category have a value at the end of the game that depends not only
                        on the final score, but also on the score before the end of the game or the order of
                        scores. We consider two popular bets in this category: Next Goal and Half Time /
                        Full Time bets. Valuation of these bets follows from Corollary 3.9.


                        A.2.1 Next Goal. The Next Goal Home bet wins if the home team scores the next
                        goal. The value of this bet is


                                                                   λ1 h                      i
                                                     Xt =               1 − e−(λ1 +λ2 )(T −t) .                              (A1)
                                                                λ1 + λ2

                          Similarly, the value of the Next Goal Away bet is equal to

                                                                   λ2 h                      i
                                                     Xt =               1 − e−(λ1 +λ2 )(T −t) .                              (A2)
                                                                λ1 + λ2


                        A.2.2 Half Time / Full Time. Half Time / Full Time bets win if the half time
                        and the full time is won by the predicted team or is a draw. Given that there are 3

                                                                            20
November 12, 2018   .    Football˙HEAD




                        outcomes in each halves, there are 9 bets in this category. For example, the value of
                        the Half Time Home / Full Time Draw bet before the end of the first half is equal
                        to:

                                                                                                
                                                      P k1 − Nt1 , λ1 T 1 − t P k2 − Nt2 , λ2 T 1 − t
                                  P          P
                          Xt =      k1 >k2   l1 =l2                     2                        2
                                                                                                
                                                      ×P l1 − k1 , λ1 T − T 1   P l2 − k2 , λ2 T − T 1 (A3)
                                                                                                         .
                                                                           2                         2



                          In the second half, this bet either becomes worthless if the first half was not won
                        by the home team or otherwise becomes equal to the Draw bet.




                                                                  21
