                   STATISTICAL INFERENCE FOR STATISTICAL DECISIONS


                                           Charles F. Manski
                         Department of Economics and Institute for Policy Research
                                         Northwestern University

                                                September 2019


                                                    Abstract

The Wald development of statistical decision theory addresses decision making with sample data. Wald's
concept of a statistical decision function (SDF) embraces all mappings of the form [data 6 decision]. An SDF
need not perform statistical inference; that is, it need not use data to draw conclusions about the true state of
nature. Inference-based SDFs have the sequential form [data 6 inference 6 decision]. This paper motivates
inference-based SDFs as practical procedures for decision making that may accomplish some of what Wald
envisioned. The paper first addresses binary choice problems, where all SDFs may be viewed as hypothesis
tests. It next considers as-if optimization, which uses a point estimate of the true state as if the estimate were
accurate. It then extends this idea to as-if maximin and minimax-regret decisions, which use point estimates
of some features of the true state as if they were accurate. The paper primarily uses finite-sample maximum
regret to evaluate the performance of inference-based SDFs. To illustrate abstract ideas, it presents specific
findings concerning treatment choice and point prediction with sample data.




I am grateful to Ivan Canay, Gary Chamberlain, Kei Hirano, Joel Horowitz, Valentyn Litvin, Bruce Spencer,
and Alex Tetenov for comments on drafts of this paper.
1. Introduction



        Early in the modern development of econometrics, Haavelmo (1943) differentiated two objectives

for empirical research. He wrote (p. 10):

        “The economist may have two different purposes in mind when he constructs a model . . . . First, he
        may consider himself in the same position as an astronomer; he cannot interfere with the actual
        course of events. So he sets up the system . . . . as a tentative description of the economy. If he finds
        that it fits the past, he hopes that it will fit the future. On that basis he wants to make predictions,
        assuming that no one will interfere with the game. Next, he may consider himself as having the
        power to change certain aspects of the economy in the future. If then the system . . . . has worked in
        the past, he may be interested in knowing it as an aid in judging the effect of his intended future
        planning, because he thinks that certain elements of the old system will remain invariant.”
The first research objective is inference and the second is decision making. This paper considers the

relationship between the two objectives.

        The Wald (1939, 1950) development of statistical decision theory addresses decision making with

sample data. Wald began with the standard decision theoretic problem of a planner (equivalently, decision

maker or agent) who must choose an action yielding welfare that depends on an unknown state of nature. The

planner specifies a state space listing the states that he considers possible. He must choose an action without

knowing the true state.

        Wald added to this standard problem by supposing that the planner observes sample data that may

be informative about the true state. He studied choice of a statistical decision function (SDF), which maps

each potential data realization into a feasible action. He proposed evaluation of SDFs as procedures, chosen

prior to observation of the data, specifying how a planner would use whatever data may be realized. Thus,

Wald’s theory is frequentist.

        Haavelmo and other early econometricians were concerned with decision making and knew of Wald’s

work. However, econometrics as a field did not embrace statistical decision theory. Instead, it focused on

statistical inference; that is, the use of sample data to draw conclusions about the true state of nature. The
                                                         2

broad word “conclusions” has multiple formal interpretations in the literature on inference. To a conditional

Bayesian, it means a posterior distribution on the state space. To a frequentist, it means a point or set-valued

estimate of the true state. Set-valued estimates include confidence sets and the results of hypothesis tests.

         Wald's concept of a statistical decision function embraces all mappings of the form [data 6 decision].

In general, a SDF need not perform statistical inference. None of the prominent decision criteria that have

been studied from Wald’s perspective—maximin, minimax-regret (MMR), and maximization of subjective

average welfare (minimization of Bayes risk, or simply Bayes)—makes reference to inference. The general

absence of inference in statistical decision theory is striking and has been noticed. See Neyman (1962) and

Blyth (1970).

         Although SDFs need not perform inference, they may do so. That is, they may have the sequential

form [data 6 inference 6 decision], first performing some form of inference and then using the inference to

make a decision. There seems to be no accepted term for such SDFs, so I call them inference-based.

         A familiar use of inference in decision making is choice between two actions based on the result of

a hypothesis test. This has been particularly common when using data from randomized trials to choose

between two medical treatments. A common case views one treatment as the status quo and the other as an

innovation. The null hypothesis is that the innovation is no better than the status quo and the alternative is

that the innovation is better. A considerable body of medical literature recommends that the status quo

treatment be used in clinical practice if the null is not rejected and that the innovation be used if it is rejected.

Conventional tests fix the probability of Type I and Type II errors at predetermined values, typically 0.05 and

0.20. Manski and Tetenov (2016) show that conventional tests generally do not provide a satisfactory decision

theoretic criterion for treatment choice. We recommend non-traditional tests that minimize maximum regret,

which symmetrically weights the probabilities and magnitudes of errors.

         Another familiar practice uses the sample data to compute a point estimate of the true state of nature,

plugs the estimate into the welfare function, and chooses an action that optimizes welfare as if this estimate

is accurate. Researchers often justify use of point estimates in decision making by citing limit theorems of
                                                        3

asymptotic theory. They observe that an estimate is consistent, asymptotically normal, and so on. However,

a planner does not seek an asymptotically attractive estimate of the true state. He seeks to make a good

decision with potentially available finite sample data. Citation of favorable asymptotic properties of point

estimates does not per se provide a firm foundation for their use in decision making.

        A famous finding relating decision making to inference is that decisions using Bayesian inference

maximize subjective average welfare. Wald studied maximization of subjective average welfare, also known

as minimization of Bayes risk. This decision criterion makes no reference to inference. It simply places a

subjective distribution on the state space and optimizes the resulting subjective average welfare. However,

examination of the optimization problem shows that the solution is an inference-based SDF when the set of

feasible statistical decision functions is unconstrained. The paradigm of conditional Bayes decision making

calls on one to first perform Bayesian inference, which transforms the prior distribution on the state space into

a posterior distribution without reference to a decision problem. One then choose an action that maximizes

posterior subjective average welfare. This procedure, applied to each possible data realization, solves Wald’s

problem of minimization of Bayes risk. See, for example, Berger (1985, Section 4.4.1).

        Concern for tractability may motivate interest in inference-based SDFs. In principle, a planner

wanting to apply statistical decision theory just needs to specify a decision criterion and apply it to his choice

problem. In practice, it may be intractable to determine a Bayes, maximin, or MMR decision. Much of the

difficulty stems from the generality of Wald's definition of a statistical decision function, which embraces all

mappings of the form [data 6 decision]. This function space encompasses all possibilities in principle, but

the breadth of options can be hard to exploit in practice. When one is unable to apply statistical decision

theory in the broad way that Wald envisioned, one may find it expedient to consider relatively simple rules

with reasonable decision theoretic properties. Inference-based SDFs may be plausible candidates.

        Treatment choice with data from a randomized trial provides an example. Exact computation of the

MMR treatment rule is generally complex. It is much simpler to compute the empirical success (ES) rule,

which chooses the treatment with the highest observed average outcome in the trial. It has been found that
                                                        4

the ES rule approximates the MMR rule well in common trial designs. See Manski (2004, 2007a), Hirano and

Porter (2009), and Stoye (2009). Kitagawa and Tetenov (2018) extend the ES rule to empirical welfare

maximization and study some of its regret properties.

        Another practical reason for study of inference-based SDF may be necessity. Wald supposed that a

planner observes data and makes a decision. In practice, there often is an institutional separation between

research and decision making. Researchers observe data and report inferences to the public. Planners do not

observe the data, only the reported inferences. Then planners can perform the mapping [inference 6 decision],

but they cannot perform the more basic mapping [data 6 decision]. They can only choose among the

inference-based SDFs made available by research reporting practices.

        This paper considers the use of statistical inference in decision making, from the Wald perspective.

My aim is not to prove new theorems, but rather to make conceptual points that I feel have not been

adequately appreciated. Section 2 reviews the basic concepts of statistical decision theory and discusses the

practical difficulty of implementing Wald’s broad vision. I then discuss various forms of inference-based

SDFs. Section 3 addresses binary choice problems, where all SDFs may be viewed as hypothesis tests.

Section 4 considers the familiar practice of as-if optimization, where one uses a point estimate of the true state

as if the estimate is accurate. Section 5 extends this idea to as-if maximin and minimax-regret decisions,

which use set estimates of the true state as if they were accurate, in the sense that the set estimate contains

the true state. Section 6 concludes.

        This paper does not address motivations for statistical inference other than decision making.

Researchers sometimes remark that they perform inference in the service of science or knowledge. I do not

attempt to interpret this motivation.
                                                       5

2. Concepts and Practicalities of Statistical Decision Theory



        In this section I first review the basic concepts of statistical decision theory, considering decision

making without sample data (Section 2.1) and with data (Sections 2.2). Attention then turns to the practical

issues that motivate study of inference-based SDFs (Sections 2.3 through 2.5).



2.1. Decisions Under Uncertainty



        Consider a planner who must choose an action yielding welfare that varies with the state of nature.

The planner has an objective function and beliefs about the true state. These are considered primitives. He

must choose an action without knowing the true state.

        Formally, the planner faces choice set C and believes that the true state lies in set S, called the state

space. The objective function w(A, A): C × S 6 R1 maps actions and states into welfare. The planner ideally

would maximize w(A, s*), where s* is the true state. However, he only knows that s* 0 S.

        The choice set is commonly considered to be predetermined. The welfare function and the state space

are subjective. The former formalizes what the decision maker wants to achieve and the latter expresses what

states of nature he believes could possibly occur.

        A close to universally accepted prescription for decision making is that choice should respect

dominance. Action c 0 C is weakly dominated if there exists a d 0 C such that w(d, s) $ w(c, s) for all s 0 S

and w(d, s) > w(c, s) for some s 0 S. Even though the true state s* is unknown, choice of d is certain to weakly

improve on choice of c.

        There is no clearly best way to choose among undominated actions, but decision theorists have not

wanted to abandon the idea of optimization. So they have proposed various ways of using the objective

function w(A, A) to form functions of actions alone, which can be optimized. In principle one should only

consider undominated actions, but it may be difficult to determine which actions are undominated. Hence,
                                                         6

it is common to optimize over the full set of feasible actions. I define decision criteria accordingly throughout

this paper. I also use max and min notation throughout, without concern for the mathematical subtleties that

sometime make it necessary to suffice with sup and inf operations.

         One broad idea is to place a subjective distribution on the state space, average state-dependent welfare

with respect to this distribution, and maximize the resulting function. This yields maximization of subjective

average welfare. Let ð be the specified probability distribution on S. For each action c, Iw(c, s)dð is the mean

of w(c, s) with respect to ð. The criterion solves the problem



(1)    max Iw(c, s)dð.
       c0C



         Another broad idea is to seek an action that, in some well-defined sense, works uniformly well over

all elements of S. This yields the maximin and MMR criteria. The maximin criterion maximizes the minimum

welfare attainable across the elements of S. For each feasible action c, consider the minimum feasible value

of w(c, s); that is, min s 0 S w(c, s). A maximin rule chooses an action that solves the problem



(2)       max     min     w(c, s).
          c0C     s0S



         The MMR criterion chooses an action that minimizes the maximum loss to welfare that can result

from not knowing the true state. A MMR choice solves the problem



(3)    min max [max w(d, s) ! w(c, s)].
      c0C s0S       d0C



Here max d 0 C w(d, s) ! w(c, s) is the regret of action c in state of nature s; that is, the welfare loss associated

with choice of c relative to an action that maximizes welfare in state s. The true state being unknown, one

evaluates c by its maximum regret over all states and selects an action that minimizes maximum regret. The
                                                      7

maximum regret of an action measures its maximum distance from optimality across all states. Hence, a

MMR choice is uniformly nearest to optimal among all feasible actions.

        A planner who asserts a partial subjective distribution on the states of nature could maximize

minimum subjective average welfare or minimize maximum average regret. These hybrid criteria combine

elements of averaging across states and concern with uniform performance across states. Hybrid criteria may

be of interest. However, I will confine discussion to the polar cases in which the planner asserts a complete

subjective distribution or none at all.



2.2. Statistical Decision Problems



        Statistical decision problems add to the above structure by supposing that the planner observes data

drawn from a sampling distribution. In practice, knowledge of the sampling distribution is generally

incomplete. To express this, one extends the concept of the state space S to list the set of feasible sampling

distributions, denoted (Qs, s 0 S).

        Let Øs denote the sample space in state s; that is, Øs is the set of samples that may be drawn under

sampling distribution Qs. The literature typically assumes that the sample space does not vary with s and is

known. I maintain this assumption and denote the known sample space as Ø, without the s subscript. Then

a statistical decision function c(@): Ø 6 C maps the sample data into a chosen action.

        SDF c(@) is a deterministic function after realization of the sample data, but it is a random function

ex ante. Hence, the welfare achieved by c(@) is a random variable ex ante. Wald’s central idea was to evaluate

the performance of c(@) in state s by Qs{w[c(ø), s]}, the ex ante distribution of welfare that it yields across

realizations ø of the sampling process.

        It remains to ask how a planner might compare the welfare distributions yielded by different SDFs.

The planner wants to maximize welfare, so it seems self-evident that he should prefer SDF d(@) to c(@) in state

s if Qs{w[d(ø), s]} stochastically dominates Qs{w[c(ø), s]}. It is less obvious how he should compare rules
                                                       8

whose welfare distributions do not stochastically dominate one another. Wald proposed measurement of the

performance of c(@) in state s by its expected welfare across samples; that is, Es{w[c(ø), s]} / Iw[c(ø), s]dQs.

An alternative that has drawn only slight attention is to measure performance by quantile welfare (Manski

and Tetenov, 2014). Writing in a context where one wants to minimize loss rather than maximize welfare,

Wald used the term risk to denote the mean performance of a SDF across samples and the term inadmissible

to denote weak dominance when evaluating performance by risk.

         In practice, one does not know the true state. Hence, one evaluates c(@) by the state-dependent

expected welfare vector (Es{w[c(ø), s]}, s 0 S). This done, statistical decision theory can use the same

decision criteria as does decision theory without sample data. Let Ã be a specified set of feasible SDFs that

map Ø 6 C. The statistical versions of decision criteria (1), (2), and (3) are



(4)       max IEs{w[c(ø), s]} dð,
          c(@) 0 Ã



(5)       max         min Es{w[c(ø), s]},
          c(@) 0 Ã    s0S



(6)       min        max ( max w(d, s) ! Es{w[c(ø), s]}).
         c(@) 0 Ã s 0 S     d0C



None of criteria (4) through (6) makes explicit reference to inference. Each directly chooses an SDF that

solves the specified problem.



2.3. Practicalities



         Wald’s development of statistical decision theory has breathtaking generality. In principle, it enables

comparison of all statistical decision functions whose risk functions exist. Evaluation of performance by

quantile welfare eliminates even this requirement. Wald’s framework enables comparison of alternative
                                                       9

sampling processes as well as decision rules. It applies to any sample size, with no asymptotic

approximations. It applies whatever information the decision maker may have. The state space may be finite

dimensional or nonparametric. The true state of nature need not be consistently estimable as sample size

increases. Thus, the theory is applicable when the true state is a partially identified probability distribution;

see Manski (2003) for background on partial identification.

        Given these features, one might anticipate that statistical decision theory would play a central role

in modern statistics and econometrics. Notable contributions emerged in the 1950s and 1960s, as described

in the monographs of Ferguson (1967) and Berger (1985). However, the early period of development of

statistical decision theory largely closed by the 1970s, with the exception of the conditional Bayes version

of Bayesian theory. Conditional Bayes analysis has continued to develop, but as a self-contained field of

study disconnected from Wald’s frequentist idea of minimization of Bayes risk.

        Why did statistical decision theory lose momentum? One reason may have been diminishing interest

in decision making as the motivation for analysis of sample data. Modern statisticians and econometricians

tend to view their objective as inference per se, rather than the use of inference in decision making. A

different reason may have been the technical difficulty of the subject. Wald’s ideas are easy to describe

abstractly, but they can be difficult to apply in practice.

        Consider the mathematical problems (4) through (6) that define Bayes, maximin, and minimax-regret

decisions. These problems are generally well-posed in principle, but they often are not solvable in practice.

Each problem requires performance of three nested operations. The inner operation integrates across the

sampling distribution of the data to determine expected welfare when a specified SDF is used in a specified

state of nature. The middle operation integrates or finds an extremum of the result of the inner operation

across the state space. The outer operation finds an extremum of the result of the middle operation across all

SDFs.

        Analytical arguments and numerical computation occasionally yield tractable solutions to these

problems. Early analytical work in the conditional Bayes paradigm studied conjugate priors, which pair
                                                      10

certain prior distributions on the state space with certain state-dependent sampling distributions for the data

to yield simple posterior distributions. Analytical solutions to certain MMR problems include the early study

by Hodges and Lehmann (1950) of point prediction with data from a random sample and the recent study by

Stoye (2009) of treatment choice with data from a randomized experiment.

        Numerical computation sometimes provides a practical alternative to analysis. Numerical solution

was generally not feasible when statistical decision theory originated in the middle of the twentieth century,

but it has become increasingly possible since then. Modern conditional Bayes analysis has increasingly

moved away from use of conjugate priors to numerical computation of posterior distributions. Numerical

determination of some maximin and MMR decisions has also become feasible. For example, Manski (2007a,

Chapter 12) and Manski and Tetenov (2016, 2019) present in tabular form the MMR solutions to certain

treatment choice problems with data from a randomized experiment. Computation of state-dependent

expected welfare, the inner operation in problems (4) through (6), can now be accomplished numerically by

Monte Carlo integration methods. Manski and Tabord-Meehan (2017) give an application that will be

discussed in Section 5.

        Future advances in analysis and numerical computation should continue to expand the settings in

which it is tractable to determine Bayes, maximin, and MMR decisions. However, I doubt that it will soon

become possible to implement these decision criteria in generality. I do not foresee imminent discovery of

a practical general way to carry out the three nested operations that define problems (4) through (6).

        The absence of a practical way to implement Wald’s broad vision motivates study of inference-based

SDFs. The prevalent practice in research on inference per se, divorced from decision making, has been to

evaluate the performance of hypothesis tests by their power and that of point estimates by their limit

properties as sample size grows. Statistical decision theory recommends that, when the objective is to make

a decision, the performance of tests and estimates should be evaluated by the expected welfare that they yield.

        Recall that Wald’s central idea is to evaluate the performance of SDF c(@) in any state s by Q{w[c(ø),

s]}, the distribution of welfare that it yields across realizations ø of the sampling process. This central idea
                                                      11

may be applied when a inference-based SDF is used to make a decision. One may measure the performance

of a hypothesis test or a point estimate by the resulting value of subjective average welfare, minimum

expected welfare, or maximum regret. Computation of these quantities requires carrying out the inner and

middle operations of problems (4) through (6), but not the outer operation.



2.4. Focus on Maximum Regret



          In the remainder of this paper, I measure the performance of SDFs by maximum regret rather than

by maximum subjective average welfare or minimum expected welfare. This section explains why.

          I have no objection to computation of subjective average welfare when one feels able to place a

credible subjective prior distribution on the state space. However, Bayesians have long struggled to provide

guidance on specification of priors and the matter continues to be controversial. The controversy suggests

that inability to express a credible prior is common in actual decision settings.

          When one finds it difficult to assert a credible subjective distribution, Bayesians who believe it

essential to use a probability distribution to express uncertainty may suggest use of some default distribution

that is variously called a “reference” or “conventional” or “objective” prior; see, for example, Berger (2006).

However, there is no consensus on the prior that should play this role. The chosen prior matters for decision

making.

          In the absence of a credible prior distribution on the state space, practical and conceptual reasons

motivate measurement of the performance of SDFs by maximum regret, rather than by minimum expected

welfare. From a practical perspective, it has been found that MMR decisions behave more reasonably than

do maximin ones in the important context of treatment choice. In common settings of treatment choice with

trial data, it has been found that the MMR rule is well approximated by the ES rule, which chooses the

treatment with the highest observed average outcome in the trial. In contrast, the maximin criterion commonly

ignores the trial data, whatever they may be. This was recognized verbally by Savage (1951), who stated that
                                                      12

the criterion is “ultrapessimistic” and wrote (p. 63): “it can lead to the absurd conclusion in some cases that

no amount of relevant experimentation should deter the actor from behaving as though he were in complete

ignorance.” Savage did not flesh out this statement, but it is easy to show that this occurs with trial data.

Manski (2004) provides a simple example.

        The conceptual appeal of using maximum regret to measure performance is that maximum regret

quantifies how lack of knowledge of the true state of nature diminishes the quality of decisions. While the

term “maximum regret” has become standard in the literature, this term is a shorthand for the maximum sub-

optimality of a decision criterion across the feasible states of nature. An STR with small maximum regret is

uniformly near-optimal across all states. This is a desirable property.



2.5. Decision Making with Models of the State Space



        To close this opening discussion of statistical decision theory, I remark on decision making with

models of the state space.

        I stated at the outset that standard decision theory begins with a planner who “specifies a state space

listing the states that he considers possible.” Thus, the state space should include all states that the planner

believes feasible. The terms “considers possible” and “believes feasible” are necessarily subjective and

context-specific.

        The state space may be a large set that is difficult to contemplate in its entirety. Hence, it is common

to perform inference and make decisions using a model of the state space. The word “model” is commonly

used informally to connote a simplification or approximation of reality. Formally, a model specifies an

alternative to the state space. Thus, model m replaces S with a model space Sm. A planner using a model to

make a decision acts as if the model space is the state space. Thus, the planner might solve problem (4), (5),

or (6) with Sm replacing S. A decision using a model need not be inference-based. However, researchers often

perform inference with models and planners often use these inferences to make decisions.
                                                       13

        The states contained in a model space may or may not be elements of the state space. The statistician

George Box famously wrote “All models are wrong but some are useful” (Box, 1979). The phrase “all models

are wrong” indicates that Box was thinking of models that simplify or approximate reality in a way that one

believes could not possibly be accurate; then Sm 1 S = i. Often, however, researchers report inferences on

models that they believe could possibly be accurate but are not necessarily so; then Sm d S.

        However one specifies a model and uses it to make a decision, statistical decision theory provides

a clear way to evaluate performance. What matters is the SDF resulting from use of a model. As with any

SDF, the performance of one using model m may be measured by its state-dependent expected welfare. The

relevant states for evaluation of performance are those in the state space S, not those in the model space Sm.

In particular, maximum regret (uniform nearness to optimality) provides an informative scalar measure of

performance.

        Thus, the Wald theory enables one to operationalize Box’s assertion that some models “are useful.”

Useful models are ones whose use in decision making yields acceptably high state-dependent expected

welfare, relative to what is possible in principle.




3. Binary Choice and Hypothesis Tests



        SDFs for binary choice problems can always be viewed as hypothesis tests. To see this, let choice

set C contain two actions, say C = {a, b}. A SDF c(@) partitions Ø into two regions that separate the data

yielding choice of each action. These regions are Øc(@)a / [ø 0 Ø: c(ø) = a] and Øc(@)b / [ø 0 Ø: c(ø) = b].

        A hypothesis test motivated by the choice problem partitions state space S into two regions, say Sa

and Sb, that separate the states in which actions a and b are uniquely optimal. Thus, Sa contains the states [s

0 S: w(a, s) > w(b, s)] and Sb contains [s 0 S: w(b, s) > w(a, s)]. The choice problem does not provide a

rationale for allocation of states in which the two actions yield equal welfare. The standard practice in testing
                                                       14

is to give one action, say a, a privileged status and to place all states yielding equal welfare in Sa. Then Sa

/ [s 0 S: w(a, s) $ w(b, s)] and Sb / [s 0 S: w(b, s) > w(a, s)].

        In the language of hypothesis testing, SDF c(@) performs a test with acceptance regions Øc(@)a and Øc(@)b.

When ø 0 Øc(@)a, c(@) accepts the hypothesis {s 0 Sa} by setting c(ø) = a. When ø 0 Øc(@)b, c(@) accepts the

hypothesis {s 0 Sb} by setting c(ø) = b. I use the word "accepts" rather than the traditional term "does not

reject" because choice of a or b is an affirmative action.

        Although all SDFs for binary choice are tests, classical hypothesis testing and statistical decision

theory evaluate tests in fundamentally different ways. Sections 3.1 and 3.2 contrast the two paradigms in

general terms. Sections 3.3 and 3.4 give specific examples.



3.1. Classical Tests



        Let us review the basic practices of classical hypothesis testing, as developed by Neyman and Pearson

(1928, 1933). Classical tests view the two hypotheses {s 0 Sa} and {s 0 Sb} asymmetrically, calling the former

the null hypothesis and the latter the alternative. The sampling probability of rejecting the null hypothesis

when it is correct is the probability of a Type I error. A longstanding convention has been to restrict attention

to tests in which the probability of a Type I error is no larger than some predetermined value á, usually 0.05,

for all s 0 Sa. In the notation of statistical decision theory, one restricts attentions to SDFs c(@) for which

Qs[c(ø) = b] # á for all s 0 Sa.

        Among tests that satisfy this restriction, classical testing seeks ones that give small probability of

rejecting the alternative hypothesis when it is correct, the probability of a Type II error. However, it generally

is not possible to attain small probability of a Type II error for all s 0 Sb. Letting S be a metric space, the

probability of a Type II error typically approaches 1 ! á as s 0 Sb nears the boundary of Sa. See, for example,

Manski and Tetenov (2016), Figure 1. Given this, the convention has been to restrict attention to states in Sb
                                                         15

that lie at least a specified distance from Sa.

          Let ñ be the metric measuring distance on S. Let ña > 0 be the specified minimum distance from Sa.

In the notation of statistical decision theory, classical testing seeks small values for the maximum value of

Qs[c(ø) = a] over s 0 Sb s.t. ñ(s, Sa) $ ña.



3.2. Decision Theoretic Evaluation of Tests



          Decision theoretic evaluation of tests does not restrict attention to tests that yield a predetermined

upper bound on the probability of a Type I error. Nor does it aim to minimize a constrained maximum value

of the probability of a Type II error. Wald’s central idea for binary choice as elsewhere is to evaluate the

performance of SDF c(@) in state s by the distribution of welfare that it yields across realizations of the

sampling process. He first addressed hypothesis testing this way in Wald (1939).

          The welfare distribution in a binary choice problem is Bernoulli, with mass points max [w(a, s), w(b,

s)] and min [w(a, s), w(b, s)]. These mass points coincide if w(a, s) = w(b, s). When s is a state where w(a,

s)    w(b, s), let Rc(@)s denote the probability that c(@) yields an error, choosing the inferior treatment over the

superior one. That is,



(7)          Rc(@)s = Qs[c(ø) = b] if w(a, s) > w(b, s),

                    = Q s[c(ø) = a] if w(b, s) > w(a, s).



The former and latter are the probabilities of Type I and Type II errors. Whereas classical testing treats these

error probabilities differently, statistical decision theory views them symmetrically.

          The probabilities that welfare equals max [w(a, s), w(b, s)] and min [w(a, s), w(b, s)] are 1 ! Rc(@)s and

Rc(@)s. Wald measured the performance of SDFs by expected welfare. In binary choice problems, expected

welfare in state s is
                                                        16

(8)      Es{w[c(ø), s]} = Rc(@)s{min [w(a, s), w(b, s)]} + [1 ! Rc(@)s]{max [w(a, s), w(b, s)]}

                           = max [w(a, s), w(b, s)] ! Rc(@)s@|w(a, s) ! w(b, s)|.



The expression Rc(@)s@|w(a, s) ! w(b, s)| is the regret of c(@) in state s. Thus, regret is the product of the error

probability and the magnitude of the welfare loss when an error occurs.

        Computation of regret in a specified state is usually practical. The welfare magnitudes w(a, s) and

w(b, s) are usually easy to compute. The error probability Rc(@)s typically does not have a simple explicit form,

but it usually can be approximated to any desired precision by Monte Carlo integration. That is, one draws

repeated pseudo-realizations of ø from the distribution Qs, computes the fraction of cases in which the

resulting c(ø) selects the inferior action, and uses this to estimate Rc(@)s.

        Whereas computation of regret in one state is not problematic, computation of maximum regret across

all feasible states may be burdensome. The state space commonly is uncountable in applications. A standard

practice when considering problems with uncountable state spaces is to discretize the space, limiting attention

to a finite subset of states that reasonably approximate the full state space. Section 3.4 illustrates.



3.3. A Medical Example



        Manski (2019) gives a simple hypothetical medical example illustrating how classical and decision

theoretic evaluation of tests differ. I paraphrase here.

        Suppose that a typically terminal form of cancer may be treated by a status quo treatment or an

innovation. It is known from experience that mean patient life span with the status quo treatment is one year.

Prior to use of the innovation, medical researchers see two possibilities for its effectiveness. It may be less

effective than the status quo, yielding a mean life span of only 1/3 of a year, or it may be much more

effective, yielding a mean life span of 5 years.

        A randomized trial is performed to learn the effectiveness of the innovation. The trial data are used
                                                       17

to perform a conventional test comparing the innovation and the status quo. The null hypothesis is that the

innovation is no more effective than the status quo and the alternative is that the innovation is more effective.

The probabilities of Type I and Type II errors are 0.05 and 0.20. The test result is used to choose between

the treatments.

        If the status quo treatment is superior, a Type I error occurs with sampling probability 0.05 and

reduces mean patient life span by 2/3 of a year (1 year minus 1/3 year), so regret is 1/30 of a year. If the

innovation is superior, a Type II error occurs with probability 0.20 and reduces mean patient life span by 4

years (5 years minus 1 year), so regret is 4/5 of a year. Use of the test to choose between the status quo and

the innovation implies that society is willing to tolerate a large (0.20) chance of a large welfare loss (4 years)

when making a Type II error, but only a small (0.05) chance of a small welfare loss (2/3 of a year) when

making a Type I error. The theory of hypothesis testing does not motivate this asymmetry.

        The maximum regret of the conventional test is 4/5 of a year. Rather than use this test to choose

treatment, one could perform a test that has smaller maximum regret. A simple option may be to reverse the

conventional probabilities of Type I and Type II errors; thus, one might perform a test with a 0.20 chance of

a Type I error and a 0.05 chance of a Type II error. If the status quo treatment is superior, the regret of this

unconventional test is 2/15 of a year; that is, a 0.20 chance of a Type I error times a 2/3 of a year reduction

in mean life span with improper choice of the innovation. If the innovation is superior, regret is 1/5 of a year;

that is, a 0.05 chance of a Type II error times a 4-year reduction in mean life span with improper choice of

the status quo. Thus, the maximum regret of the unconventional test is 1/5 of a year.

        In this example, the unconventional test delivers much smaller maximum regret than does the

conventional test. Other tests may perform even better.



3.4. Comparing a Classical Test with One that Minimizes Maximum Regret



        Manski and Tetenov (2016) compare a classical test with one that minimizes maximum regret, in a
                                                        18

simple context where the MMR decision is known. The context is choice between two treatments, say t = a

and t = b, when the outcome of interest is binary, with y(t) = 1 denoting success and y(t) = 0 failure. State

s indicates a possible value for the pair of outcome probabilities {Ps[y(a) = 1], Ps[y(b) = 1]}. The welfare

yielded by treatment t in state s is w(t, s) = Ps[y(t) = 1].

        The sample data are the findings of a balanced randomized trial, assigning the same number N of

subjects to each treatment. In this setting, Stoye (2009) shows that the ES rule is the MMR decision. A widely

used classical test is a one-sided two-sample z-test, which asymptotically makes the probability of a Type I

error equal to 0.05. See Fleiss (1973) for details.

        The regret of any test c(@) in any state s is Rc(@)s@|Ps[y(a) = 1] ! Ps[y(b) = 1]|. The quantity |Ps[y(a) =

1] ! Ps[y(b) = 1]| is the absolute value in state s of the average treatment effect comparing welfare with

treatments a and b. Thus, the regret of a test in state s is the product of its error probability and the absolute

value of the effect size.

        We suppose that the planner has no a priori knowledge of the outcome probabilities. Hence, the state

space is the rectangle [0, 1]2. We approximate maximum regret by computing regret over a dense finite grid

of states, thus discretizing the state space.

        Figure 1 of Manski and Tetenov (2016) shows how the regret incurred by the ES rule and the z-test

rule varies with the effect size for a sample size of N = 145 per treatment arm. Maximum regret is 0.01 for

the ES rule and 0.05 for the z-test. Maximum regret for each test occurs at an intermediate effect size. Regret

is necessarily small for small effect sizes. Regret is also small for large effect sizes, because the probability

of error declines with the effect size. The intermediate effect sizes at which regret is maximized differ for the

two tests, reflecting the differences in their state-specific error probabilities. For the ES rule, regret is

maximized when the effect size is approximately ±0.03 and the error probability is approximately 0.35. For

the z-test, regret is maximized when the effect size is approximately 0.08 and the error probability is

approximately 0.6.
                                                      19

4. As-If Optimization



        The Introduction mentioned the common practice of using sample data to compute a point estimate

of the true state of nature and choice of an action that optimizes welfare as if this estimate is accurate. This

section elaborates. Section 4.1 considers the practice in abstraction. Section 4.2 specializes to the important

class of statistical decision problems in which states are probability distributions and the data are a random

sample from the true distribution. Sections 4.3 and 4.4 consider use of the empirical success rule from the

decision theoretic perspective of maximum regret.



4.1. General Considerations



         A point estimate is a function s(@): Ø 6 S that maps data into a state of nature. As-if optimization

means solution of the problem max c 0 C w[c, s(ø)]. When as-if optimization yields multiple solutions, one may

use some auxiliary rule to select one. Then one obtains the SDF c[s(@)], where



(9)   c[s(ø)] / argmax w[c, s(ø)],      ø 0 Ø.
                   c0C



Solving problem (10) is often much simpler than solving the general problems (4) through (6).

        Researchers often motivate use of point estimates in decision making by citing limit theorems of

asymptotic theory. They hypothesize a sequence of sampling processes indexed by sample size N and a

corresponding sequence of point estimates sN(@): ØN 6 S. They show that the sequence is consistent when

specified assumptions hold. That is, sN(ø) 6 s* as N 6 4, in probability or almost surely.

        The concept of regret provides a decision theoretic interpretation of the concept of consistency. We

may say that a sequence of SDFs c[sN(ø)] generated by as-if optimization is pointwise consistent if regret

converges to zero in all states of nature as N 6 4. It is uniformly consistent if maximum regret converges to
                                                       20

zero. Going beyond consistency, the theoretical statistics literature on limits of experiments (Le Cam, 1972)

has developed a delicate form of local asymptotic analysis that seeks to provide guidance for decision making.

See Hirano and Porter (2009, 2019) for applications to treatment choice.

        Asymptotic arguments can be suggestive, but they do not prove that as-if optimization has desirable

properties when used with finite samples. As with other SDFs, statistical decision theory evaluates as-if

optimization in state s by the welfare sampling distribution Qs{w{c[s(ø)], s}} that it yields. As with other

SDFs, Wald would measure performance by expected welfare Es{w{c[s(ø)], s}}. Statistical decision theory

calls for study of the behavior of expected welfare across the state space.



4.2. Solving Sample Analogs of Decision Problems where States are Probability Distributions



        Wald’s broad vision of statistical decision theory places no restrictions on the nature of the state space

and the sample data. Nevertheless, research using the theory has focused to a considerable degree on a class

of problems that connect the state space and the sampling distribution in a simple way. These are problems

in which states are probability distributions and the data are a random sample drawn from the true

distribution.

        In such problems, a natural form of as-if optimization is to act as if the empirical distribution of the

data is the true population distribution. The usual justification is asymptotic. The empirical distribution

consistently estimates the population distribution and has various further desirable asymptotic properties. This

suggests use of the empirical distribution in decision making.

        Familiar examples of this class of as-if optimization methods occur when states are distributions for

a real random variable and the decision problem is to predict the value of a realization drawn at random from

the true distribution. When welfare is measured by state-dependent square and absolute loss, the ideal best

predictors are the population mean and median. When the true distribution is not known but data from a

random sample are observed, as-if optimization suggests use of the sample average and median as predictors.
                                                     21

        Another familiar example occurs when states are multivariate distributions of treatment response and

the decision problem is to choose treatments for members of the population. When welfare is measured by

the mean outcome of treatment across the population, the ideal best treatment maximizes this mean outcome.

When the true distribution of treatment response is not known but outcomes in a randomized trial are

observed, as-if optimization suggests use of the empirical success rule.

        Manski and Tetenov (2016) derive finite-sample bounds on maximum regret when the ES rule is used

to choose treatments with data from a randomized trial. Section 4.3 summarizes this analysis.



4.3. Bounds on Maximum Regret for Treatment Choice with the Empirical Success Rule



        I discussed earlier the MMR property of the ES rule in problems with two treatments and balanced

designs. Research to date has not been able to fully characterize the MMR rule in problems with multiple

treatments or unbalanced designs. Nevertheless, Manski and Tetenov (2016) use large deviations inequalities

for sample averages of bounded outcomes to obtain informative and easily computable upper bounds on the

maximum regret of the ES rule. Their Proposition 1 extends an early finding of Manski (2004) from two to

multiple treatments. Proposition 2 derives a new large-deviations bound for multiple treatments.

        Let K be the number of treatment arms and let M be the range of the bounded outcome. When the

trial has a balanced design, with n subjects per treatment arm, the bounds on maximum regret proved in

Propositions 1 and 2 have particularly simple forms, being



(10)       (2e) –½M(K – 1)n–½,



(11)       M (ln K) ½n–½.



Result (10) provides a tighter bound than (11) for two or three treatments. Result (11) gives a tighter bound
                                                           22

for four or more treatments.



4.4. Using the Empirical Success Rule when Random Treatment Selection is a Model



           The above consideration of the ES rule assumed treatment choice with data from a randomized trial.

Treatment selection is random in an ideal trial. Thus, the state space only includes states in which potential

treatment response is statistically independent of the treatments that persons in the study population actually

receive.

           A planner may use the ES rule with data from an observational study or a trial with imperfect

compliance. In these settings, random treatment selection may be just a model as discussed in Section 2.6,

not a credible assumption. Then the bounds on maximum regret given in (10) and (11) do not hold. Indeed,

maximum regret need not converge to zero as sample size increases.

           Consider the case with two treatments, say {a, b}. Each member of the study population has potential

outcomes [y(a), y(b)]. Let binary indicators [ä(a), ä(b)] denote whether these outcomes are observable. In a

study where all realized outcomes are observed, only counterfactual outcomes are unobserved. Hence, the

possible values for the observability indicators are [ä(a) = 1, ä(b) = 0] and [ä(a) = 0, ä(b) = 1]. In a study with

missing data on some realized outcomes, [ä(a) = ä(b) = 0] for some persons.

           Each element s of the state space denotes a possible distribution Ps[y(a), y(b), ä(a), ä(b)] of outcomes

and observability. In an ideal trial, y(@) is statistically independent of ä(@) in every feasible state. This implies

that Es[y(t)|ä(t) = 1] = Es[y(t)], t 0 {a, b} for all s 0 S. However, this need not hold when the data are not

generated by an ideal trial.

           Section 3 observed that the regret of any SDF c(@) in state s is Rc(@)s@|Es[y(b)] ! Es[y(a)]|. Regret is zero

in states where Es[y(b)] = Es[y(a)], so it suffices to consider ones where Es[y(b)] Es[y(a)]. Let S+ denote the

states in which Es[y(a)|ä(a) =1]       Es[y(b)|ä(b) = 1], with the same ordering as Es[y(a)] and Es[y(b)]. Let S-

denote the states in which Es[y(a)|ä(a) = 1] Es[y(b)|ä(b) = 1], with the reverse order of Es[y(a)] and Es[y(b)].
                                                         23

Let S= denote the states in which Es[y(a)|ä(a) = 1] = Es[y(b)|ä(b) = 1].

         Suppose that Ps[ä(a) = 1] > 0 and Ps[ä(b) =1] > 0 in all feasible states. Then the ES rule is generically

well-defined. As sample size increases, empirical success for treatments a and b converge to Es[y(a)|ä(a) =1]

and Es[y(b)|ä(b) = 1] respectively. Hence the error probability with the ES rule converges to zero in each of

the states in S+ and to one in each of the states in S-. The error probability may not converge in s 0 S=. Hence,

the maximum regret of the ES rule asymptotically lies in the interval with lower bound max s 0 S- |Es[y(b)] !

Es[y(a)]| and upper bound max s 0 S- c S= |Es[y(b)] ! Es[y(a)]| .

         Recall Box’s statement that a model may be wrong but useful. The above derivation indicates that,

from the perspective of treatmentchoice, the model of random treatment selection is useful when the sets S-

and S= are empty. Then the maximum regret of the ES rule converges to zero even though treatment selection

may not be random. One might continue to consider this model useful if S- and S= are not empty, but max s

0 S- c S= |Es[y(b)] ! Es[y(a)]| is small.




5. As-If Decisions with Set Estimates of the True State



         As-if optimization uses data to compute a point estimate of the true state of nature and chooses an

action that optimizes welfare as if this estimate is accurate. An obvious extension is to use data to compute

a set-valued estimate of the true state and then act as if the set estimate is accurate. Whereas a point estimate

s(@): Ø 6 S maps data into an element of S, a set estimate S(@): Ø 6 2S maps data into a subset of S. Given data

ø, one acts as if the state space is S(ø) rather than the larger set S.

         In particular, one could solve these data-dependent versions of problems (1) through (3):



(1N)         max Iw(c, s)dð(ø),
             c0C
                                                         24

(2N)        max     min    w(c, s),
            c0C     s 0 S(ø)



(3N)        min     max    [max w(d, s) ! w(c, s)].
            c 0 C s 0 S(ø) d 0 C



In the case of (1N), ð(ø) is a subjective distribution on the set S(ø).

         From a computational perspective, these as-if problems are generally easier to solve than are the

actual maximin and MMR problems with sample data, stated in (4) through (6). The as-if problems fix ø and

select one action c, whereas the actual problems require one to consider all potential samples and choose a

decision function c(@). The as-if problems compute welfare values w(c, s), whereas the actual problems must

compute more complex expected welfare values Es{w[c(ø), s]}. Sections 5.2 and 5.3 provide examples.

         An alternative type of as-if approach replaces S by S(ø) in the middle operations of (4) through (6),

but it does not replace Es{w[c(ø), s]} by w(c, s) in the innermost part of each criterion. This approach

simplifies (4) through (6) by shrinking the state space over which the middle operations are performed.

However, it is more complex than (1N) through (3N) for two reasons. It requires choice of a decision function

c(@) rather than a single action c, and it must compute Es{w[c(ø), s]} rather than w(c, s). Chamberlain (2000)

uses asymptotic considerations to suggest this type of as-if decision making and presents an application.

         Asymptotic arguments suggest that as-if maximin and MMR decision making should be attractive

in settings where states of nature are probability distributions and the sampling process generating data

partially identifies the true distribution. Let H(s*) denote the identification region for the true state s*; that is,

the subset of S that the sampling process would ideally reveal with observable population rather than sample

data.

         Research on inference on partially identified distributions shows that, given modest regularity

conditions, the sampling process enables consistent estimation of H(s*); that is, there exist sequences of set

estimates such that SN(ø) 6 H(s*) as N 6 4, in probability or almost surely. See Molinari (2019) for review

of the literature on inference. Given regularity conditions on the welfare function and choice set, consistency
                                                      25

of SN(@) implies consistency of as-if decision making.

        Asymptotic arguments per se suggest, but do not prove, that as-if decision making has desirable

finite-sample properties. Sections 5.2 and 5.3 summarize work on two settings with missing data in which

as-if MMR decisions have been studied. Section 5.4 briefly considers decision making using confidence sets

as set estimates.



5.2. As-If MMR Point Prediction with Missing Data



        Among the earliest statistical decision problems that have been studied is best point prediction of a

real outcome under square loss. The ideal, but unknown, best predictor in this familiar setting is the

population mean outcome. The risk of a candidate predictor using finite sample data is the sum of the

population variance of the outcome and the mean square error (MSE) of the predictor as an estimate of the

mean outcome. The regret of a predictor is its MSE as an estimate of the mean. An MMR predictor minimizes

maximum mean square error. Thus, MMR prediction of the outcome is equivalent to minimax estimation of

the population mean. I summarize here recent research on MMR prediction when some sample data are

missing.



5.2.1. Analytical Findings

        Hodges and Lehman (1950) derived the MMR predictor with data from a random sample when the

outcome has known bounded support and all sample data are observed. Normalizing the support to be the

interval [0, 1], Theorem 6.1 proves that the MMR predictor is (m%N + ½)(%N + 1)-1, where N is sample size

and m is the sample average outcome. One might interpret this as an inference-based SDF, using m to

estimate the population mean outcome. However, the MMR predictor does not perform as-if optimization.

Rather than consider m to be an accurate estimate of the population mean, it recognizes statistical imprecision

by shrinking m toward the value ½.
                                                      26

        Dominitz and Manski (2017) study best prediction under square loss with data from a random sample

with some missing outcome data. It is computationally challenging to determine the MMR predictor when

some data are missing. Seeking an approach that is both tractable and reasonable, the paper studies as-if

MMR prediction. The analysis assumes knowledge of the fraction of the population with missing data, but

it makes no assumption about the population distribution of missing outcomes.

        Lacking knowledge of the distribution of missing outcomes, the population mean outcome is partially

identified when the outcome of interest has bounded support. Its identification region is an easy-to-compute

interval derived in Manski (1989). If this interval were known, the MMR predictor would be its midpoint.

The identification interval is not known with sample data, but one can compute its sample analog and use the

midpoint of the sample-analog interval as the predictor.

        This midpoint predictor is easy to compute. Its maximum regret has a simple analytical form. Let ä

indicate the observability of an outcome. Let P(ä = 1) and P(ä = 0) denote the fractions of the population

whose outcomes are and are not observable. Let N be the number of observed sample outcomes, which is

fixed rather than random under the assumed survey design. The paper proves that the maximum regret of the

midpoint predictor is ¼[P(ä = 1)2/N + P(ä = 0)2].

        Dominitz and Manski (2019) build on the work in Dominitz and Manski (2017) to study MMR

prediction under square loss of functions of two variables, when some data on one variable are missing. This

prediction problem may arise in longitudinal data collection with attrition, if there is a 100-percent response

rate in period 1 and some nonresponse in period 2. It may also arise in cross-sectional collection of data on

two household members or in surveys with item nonresponse.

        Predicting the value of functions of two variables is more complex than functions of one variable,

because the form of the function matters. The paper focuses on prediction of linear and indicator functions.

It is easy to compute midpoint predictors akin to that posed in the previous study. The paper obtains an

analytical expression for maximum regret when predicting the value of an indicator function. It derives an

analytical upper bound on maximum regret when predicting the value of linear functions.
                                                     27

5.2.2. Numerical Computation of Maximum Regret

        The analytical findings on the maximum regret of midpoint predictors described above assume

knowledge of the fraction of the population with missing data. Midpoint predictors remain easy to compute

when this fraction is not known and instead is estimated by its sample analog. In this case, derivation of an

analytical expression for maximum regret does not seem possible but numerical computation is tractable.

        Manski and Tabord-Meehan (2017) describe an algorithm coded in STATA for numerical

computation of the maximum regret of the midpoint predictor and other user-specified predictors in the

setting of Dominitz and Manski (2017), where the objective is to predict a bounded real outcome. The

program, named wald_mse, does not require knowledge of the population fraction of missing data. Instead,

P(z = 0) may be estimated by its sample analog.

        Letting y denote the outcome of interest, the state space has the form [Ps(y|ä = 1), Ps(y|ä = 0), Ps(ä

= 0)], s 0 S]. An important feature of wald_mse is that the user can specify the state space flexibly. For

example, the user may assume that nonresponse will be no higher than 80% or that the mean value of the

outcome for nonresponders will be no lower than 0.5. The user may impose no restrictions connecting the

two outcome distributions Ps(y|ä = 1) and Ps(y|ä = 0), or he may bound the difference between these

distributions.

        Given any state s, the algorithm uses Monte Carlo integration to approximate the MSE of a user-

specified predictor. The quality of the approximation is controlled by user specification of the number of

pseudo realizations of (y, ä) that are drawn. Increasing the number yields a better approximation at the cost

of longer computation time.

        The algorithm embodies two approaches to maximize MSE across the state space, one applicable

when the outcome is binary and the other when the outcome has a continuous distribution. When y is binary,

Ps(y|ä = 1), Ps(y|ä = 0), and Ps(ä = 0) are all Bernoulli distributions. The algorithm approximates the state

space by a finite grid over the possible Bernoulli parameters for each distribution. It then maximizes MSE

over the grid. The user controls the quality of the approximation to the state space by specifying the density
                                                     28

of the grid. Increasing the density yields a better approximation at the cost of longer computation time.

        When y is continuous, the algorithm presumes that Ps(y|ä = 1) and Ps(y|ä = 0) are Beta distributions,

while Ps(ä = 0) is a Bernoulli distribution. Supposing that the two outcome distributions are Beta is a

substantive restriction, imposed to achieve a relatively flexible and tractable approximation. The state space

is approximated by a finite grid over the possible shape parameters of the Beta distributions and over the

possible values of the Bernoulli parameter. As before, the user specifies the density of the grid and the

algorithm maximizes mean square error over the grid.



5.3. As-If MMR Treatment Choice with Missing Outcome Data



        Sections 3 and 4 discussed treatment choice with data from ideal randomized trials, where the only

inferential issue is finite-sample statistical imprecision. When choosing treatments with data from non-ideal

trials and observational studies, planners must also contend with serious identification problems. Section 4.4

discussed using the ES rule when random treatment selection is a model. However, this approach acts as if

identification problems are not present. In general, the ES rule does not minimize maximum regret when

identification problems are recognized.

        Manski (2007b) studies MMR choice between two treatments {a, b} when some realized outcomes

in a study population are unobservable and the distribution of missing data is unknown. The data may be an

observational study where one observes a random sample of persons whose treatments were selected in an

unknown way; then the planner neither observes the outcomes of non-selected treatments nor knows the

distribution of such outcomes. Or the data may be the findings of a randomized trial in which some subjects

drop out for unknown reasons before their outcomes can be measured. In these settings, the inferential

problems include both partial identification and finite-sample imprecision. The analysis is performed

conditional on observed covariates of population members, which I suppress for simplicity here.

        As in Section 4.4, each member of the study population has potential outcomes [y(a), y(b)]. Binary
                                                       29

indicators [ä(a), ä(b)] again denote whether these outcomes are observable. Each element s of the state space

denotes a possible distribution P s[y(a), y(b), ä(a), ä(b)] of outcomes and observability.

        The set C of feasible actions are fractional treatment allocations, assigning the fraction z(b) 0 [0, 1]

of persons to treatment b and the fraction z(a) = 1 ! z(b) to treatment a. Supposing that the population is large

and that its members are observationally identical, prospective treatment assignment is necessarily random.

The welfare yielded by allocation z(@) in state s is w[z(@), s] = [1 ! z(a)]@Es[y(a)] + z(b)@Es[y(b)].



5.3.1. MMR Treatment with Partial Identification of the Population Outcome Distribution

        I first focus on the identification problem generated by missing data and abstract from finite-sample

imprecision in the data. To do this, I assume for now that the relevant observable features of the population

are known. These are the distributions P[y(t)|ä(t) = 1] and P[ä(t)], t 0 {a, b}. In particular, et / E[y(t)|ä(t) =

1] and pt / P[ä(t) = 1] are known.

        I assume that outcomes are bounded, with known finite lower and upper bounds y0t and y1t, but

otherwise assume no knowledge of the distributions of unobservable outcomes P[y(t)|ä(t) = 0], t 0 {a, b}. In

this setting, Proposition 1 of Manski (2007b) shows that the treatment allocation that minimizes maximum

regret over all possible distributions of missing data is



(12)       z*(b) = 1 if (ea ! y1a)pa + (y0b ! eb)pb + (y1a ! y0b) < 0,

                 = 0 if (e b ! y1b)pb + (y0a ! ea)pa + (y1b ! y0a) < 0,

                           (e b ! y1b)pb + (y0a ! ea)pa + (y1b ! y0a)
              = —————————————————————                                         otherwise.
                (y 0b ! y1b)pb + (y0a ! y1a)pa + (y1b ! y0b) + (y1a ! y0a)



        Proposition 1 shows that the minimax-regret rule assigns all persons to treatment b if and only if this

treatment dominates the alternative; that is, if and only if b yields higher mean welfare than a under all

possible distributions of the missing data. It is easy to verify that b dominates a if and only if (ea ! y1a)pa +
                                                       30

(y0b ! eb)pb + (y1a ! y0b) < 0. Similarly, the minimax-regret rule assigns all persons to treatment a if and only

if that treatment dominates b. When neither treatment dominates, the minimax-regret rule randomly assigns

positive fractions of observationally identical persons to both treatments. The fraction allocated to treatment

b increases with eb, which measures the observable success of treatment b, and decreases with ea, which

measures the observable success of treatment a.

        Suppose that y0 / y0a = y0b, y1 / y1a = y1b, and p / pa + pb # 1. Inspection of (12) shows that neither

treatment dominates when these conditions hold, whatever values ea and eb may take. The minimax-regret

rule is the fractional treatment allocation



                   e bpb + y1(1 ! pb) ! eapa ! y0(1 ! pa)
            *
(13)       z (b) = ——————————————— .
                                (y 1 ! y0)(2 ! p)


        I call p the observability score for persons and I say that missing data are prevalent if p # 1. Missing

data are necessarily prevalent when the data are from an observational study where treatments in the study

population were selected in an unknown way. In this situation, pa and pb can be no larger than the probabilities

that treatments a and b are chosen; hence, p # 1. In such a study, p = 1if all realized outcomes are observed.



5.3.2. As-If MMR Treatment with Sample Data



        Suppose now that the data are a random sample of the study population. Then the quantities (ea, eb,

pa, pb) needed to compute the MMR allocation (12) are not known, but they may be estimated by their sample

analogs. Let N denote sample size and let [(eNt, pNt), t 0 {a, b}] be the sample estimates. The as-if MMR

decision using these estimates is the treatment allocation



(14)      zN(b) = 1 if (eNa ! y1a)pNa + (y0b ! eNb)pNb + (y1a ! y0b) < 0,
                                                        31

                 = 0 if (e Nb ! y1b)pNb + (y0a ! eNa)pNa + (y1b ! y0a) < 0,

                           (e Nb ! y1b)pNb + (y0a ! eNa)pNa + (y1b ! y0a)
                 = —————————————————————                                          otherwise.
                   (y 0b ! y1b)pNb + (y0a ! y1a)pNa + (y1b ! y0b) + (y1a ! y0a)



        In general, Manski (2007b) was only able to motivate allocation (13) asymptotically, pointing out

that lim N 6 4 [(eNt, pNt), t 0 {a, b} = [(et , pt), t, 0 {a, b}] a. s. by the strong law of large numbers. However,

a finite-sample result was obtained when y0 / y0a = y0b, y1 / y1a = y1b, and the value of p is known, with p #

1. Then (12) reduces to



                   e bpb + y1(1 ! pb) ! eapa ! y0(1 ! pa)
            *
(15)       z (b) = ———————————————,
                                 (y 1 ! y0)(2 ! p)


whose finite-sample analog is



                   e NbpNb + y1(1 ! pNb) ! eNapNa ! y0(1 ! pNa)
(16)       zN(b) = ————————————————— .
                                   (y 1 ! y0)(2 ! p)


        Proposition 2 shows that (17) is a finite-sample MMR treatment allocation. The proof rests on two

facts. First, expected welfare is a linear function of the treatment allocation. Second E[zN(b)] = z*(b) when

y0 / y0a = y0b, y1 / y1a = y1b, and p # 1.

        Proposition 2 shows that zN(b) is a finite-sample MMR decision, not the unique such decision. Any

unbiased estimate of the MMR decision with knowledge of observable features of the population is finite-

sample MMR. A curious implication is that, under the assumptions of Proposition 2, there is no advantage

to large sample size from the finite-sample MMR perspective. Observing one randomly drawn person

receiving each treatment is as good as observing all such persons. I am not aware of other decision problems

in which there exist unbiased estimates of the MMR decision with knowledge of observable features of the
                                                        32

population.



5.4. As-If Decisions Using Confidence Sets as Set Estimates



        In Section 3, I cautioned against use of classical hypothesis tests to make decisions. It would be better

for planners making binary choices to use tests with good decision-theoretic properties. I suggested evaluation

of performance by maximum regret, as illustrated in Sections 3.4 and 3.5.

        Complementary to classical testing has been the practice of reporting confidence sets, these being

set estimates of the true state that have specified coverage probabilities. A confidence set with uniform

coverage probability á is a set estimate S(@) such that Qs[ø: s 0 S(ø)] $ á for all s 0 S. Coverage probabilities

are well-defined whatever the nature of the state space. Although statistical theory long focused on settings

where states are point-identified parameters of probability distributions, research in econometrics has shown

that confidence sets with desired asymptotic properties remain well-defined and computable when states are

partially identified.

        Researchers have generally used confidence sets to quantify statistically imprecise inference, without

reference to decision problems. Nevertheless, they could be used to make as-if decisions with criteria (1N)

through (3N). An open question for future research is to determine the welfare consequences when these

criteria are applied with confidence sets.

        When addressing this question, I expect that it will be productive to abandon the conventional

practice of a priori specifying the coverage probability of a confidence set. This practice mirrors classical

testing, which restricts attention to test statistics that yield at most a specified probability of Type I error.
                                                     33

6. Conclusion



         Inference makes no explicit appearance in Wald’s statistical decision theory. Neyman (1962)

remarked (p. 16): “In my opinion, the inferential theory solves no problem but, given a degree of earnestness

of the authors, may create the illusion that it does.” Nevertheless, inference-based SDFs may have desirable

theoretic properties and be tractable. When this is so, inference-based SDFs are worthy of study. This paper

has given illustrations in the domains of point prediction and treatment choice.

        I remarked at the outset that another reason to study inference-based SDFs may be necessity, due to

institutional separation between research and decision making. When planners observe inferences drawn by

researchers rather than raw data, they can perform the mapping [inference 6 decision] but they cannot perform

the more basic mapping [data 6 decision]. They can only choose among the inference-based SDFs made

possible by research reporting practices. Given this, an important subject for future study is to learn the

properties of SDFs that use the inferences provided by common reporting practices.
                                                    34

References


Berger, J. (1985), Statistical Decision Theory and Bayesian Analysis, New York: Springer-Verlag.

Blyth, C. (1970), “On the Inference and Decision Models of Statistics,” The Annals of Mathematical
Statistics, 41, 1034-1058.

Box, G. (1979), “Robustness in the Strategy of Scientific Model Building,” in R. Launer and G. Wilkinson
(eds.), Robustness in Statistics, New York: Academic Press, 201-236.

Chamberlain G. (2000), “Econometric Applications of Maxmin Expected Utility,” Journal of Applied
Econometrics, 15, 625-644.

Dominitz, J. and C. Manski (2017), “More Data or Better Data? A Statistical Decision Problem,” Review of
Economic Studies, 84, 1583-1605.

Dominitz, J. and C. Manski (2019), “Minimax-Regret Sample Design in Anticipation of Missing Data, With
Application to Panel Data,” Department of Economics, Northwestern University.

Ferguson, T. (1967), Mathematical Statistics: A Decision Theoretic Approach, Academic Press: San Diego.

Fleiss, J. (1973), Statistical Methods for Rates and Proportions, Wiley: New York.

Haavelmo, T. (1943), “The Statistical Implications of a System of Simultaneous Equations,” Econometrica,
11, 1-12.

Hirano, K. and J. Porter (2009), “Asymptotics for Statistical Treatment Rules,” Econometrica, 77,1683-1701.

Hirano, K. and J. Porter (2019), “Statistical Decision Rules in Econometrics,” in Handbook of Econometrics,
Vol. 7, edited by S. Durlauf, L. Hansen, J. Heckman, and R. Matzkin, Amsterdam: North Holland,
forthcoming.

Kitagawa, T. and A. Tetenov (2018), “Who Should be Treated? Empirical Welfare Maximization Methods
for Treatment Choice,” Econometrica, 86, 591-616.

Le Cam, L. (1972): “Limits of Experiments,” in Proceedings of the Sixth Berkeley Symposium of
Mathematical Statistics, 1, 245–261.

Manski, C. (1988), "Ordinal Utility Models of Decision Making Under Uncertainty," Theory and Decision,
25, 79-104.

Manski, C. (1989), “Anatomy of the Selection Problem,” Journal of Human Resources, 24, 343-360.

Manski, C. (2003), Partial Identification of Probability Distributions, New York: Springer.

Manski, C. (2004), "Statistical Treatment Rules for Heterogeneous Populations," Econometrica, 72, 221-246.

Manski, C. (2007a), Identification for Prediction and Decision, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
                                                     35

Manski, C. (2007b), “Minimax-Regret Treatment Choice with Missing Outcome Data,” Journal of
Econometrics, 139, 105-115.

Manski, C. (2019), “Treatment Choice with Trial Data: Statistical Decision Theory should Supplant
Hypothesis Testing,” The American Statistician, 73, 296-304.

Manski, C. and M. Tabord-Meehan (2017), “Wald MSE: Evaluating the Maximum MSE of Mean Estimates
with Missing Data,” STATA Journal, 17, 723-735.

Manski, C. and A. Tetenov (2014), "The Quantile Performance of Statistical Treatment Rules Using
Hypothesis Tests to Allocate a Population to Two Treatments," cemmap working paper CWP44/14.

Manski, C. and A. Tetenov (2016), “Sufficient Trial Size to Inform Clinical Practice,” Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 113, 10518-10523.

Manski, C. and A. Tetenov (2019), “Trial Size for Near-Optimal Choice Between Surveillance and
Aggressive Treatment: Reconsidering MSLT-II,” The American Statistician, 73, S1, 305-311.

Molinari, F. (2019), “Econometrics with Partial Identification,” in Handbook of Econometrics, Vol. 7A, edited
by S. Durlauf, L. Hansen, J. Heckman, and R. Matzkin, Amsterdam: North Holland, forthcoming.

Neyman, J. and E. Pearson (1928), “On the Use and Interpretation of Certain Test Criteria for Purposes of
Statistical Inference,” Biometrika, 20A, 175-240, 263-294.

Neyman, J. and E. Pearson (1933), “On the Problem of the Most Efficient Tests of Statistical Hypotheses,”
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London, Ser. A, 231, 289-337.

Neyman, J. (1962), “Two Breakthroughs in the Theory of Statistical Decision Making,” Review of the
International Statistical Institute, 30, 11-27.

Stoye, J. (2009), "Minimax Regret Treatment Choice with Finite Samples," Journal of Econometrics, 151,
70-81.

Stoye, J. (2012), “Minimax Regret Treatment Choice with Covariates or with Limited Validity of
Experiments,” Journal of Econometrics, 166, 138-156.

Wald, A. (1939), “Contribution to the Theory of Statistical Estimation and Testing Hypotheses," Annals of
Mathematical Statistics, 10, 299-326.

Wald A. (1950), Statistical Decision Functions, New York: Wiley.
