                           ECONOMETRICS FOR DECISION MAKING:
                        Building Foundations Sketched by Haavelmo and Wald

                                          Charles F. Manski
                        Department of Economics and Institute for Policy Research
                                        Northwestern University

                     First public version December 2019. This version February 2021


                                                   Abstract

Haavelmo (1944) proposed a probabilistic structure for econometric modeling, aiming to make
econometrics useful for decision making. His fundamental contribution has become thoroughly embedded
in subsequent econometric research, yet it could not answer all the deep issues that the author raised.
Notably, Haavelmo struggled to formalize the implications for decision making of the fact that models can
at most approximate actuality. In the same period, Wald (1939, 1945) initiated his own seminal
development of statistical decision theory. Haavelmo favorably cited Wald, but econometrics did not
embrace statistical decision theory. Instead, it focused on study of identification, estimation, and statistical
inference. This paper proposes statistical decision theory as a framework for evaluation of the performance
of models in decision making. I particularly consider the common practice of as-if optimization:
specification of a model, point estimation of its parameters, and use of the point estimate to make a decision
that would be optimal if the estimate were accurate. A central theme is that one should evaluate as-if
optimization or any other model-based decision rule by its performance across the state space, listing all
states of nature that one believes feasible, not across the model space. I apply the theme to prediction and
treatment choice. Statistical decision theory is conceptually simple, but application is often challenging.
Advancement of computation is the primary task to continue building the foundations sketched by
Haavelmo and Wald.




An early draft of this paper provided the source material for my Haavelmo Lecture at the University of
Oslo, December 3, 2019. The paper supersedes one circulated in January and September 2019 under the
draft title “Statistical Inference for Statistical Decisions.” I am grateful to Valentyn Litvin for excellent
research assistance and comments. I am grateful to Olav Bjerkholt, Ivan Canay, Gary Chamberlain, Michael
Gmeiner, Kei Hirano, Joel Horowitz, Guido Imbens, Matt Masten, Bruce Spencer, Alex Tetenov, and
anonymous reviewers for helpful comments.
                                                       1


1. Introduction: Joining Haavelmo and Wald



    Early in the development of econometrics, Trygve Haavelmo compared astronomy and planning to

differentiate two objectives for modeling: to advance science and to inform decision making. He wrote

(Haavelmo, 1943, p. 10):

        “The economist may have two different purposes in mind when he constructs a model . . . . First,
        he may consider himself in the same position as an astronomer; he cannot interfere with the actual
        course of events. So he sets up the system . . . . as a tentative description of the economy. If he finds
        that it fits the past, he hopes that it will fit the future. On that basis he wants to make predictions,
        assuming that no one will interfere with the game. Next, he may consider himself as having the
        power to change certain aspects of the economy in the future. If then the system . . . . has worked
        in the past, he may be interested in knowing it as an aid in judging the effect of his intended future
        planning, because he thinks that certain elements of the old system will remain invariant.”
Jacob Marschak, supporting Haavelmo’s work, made a related distinction between meteorological and

engineering types of inference; see Bjerkholt (2010) and Marschak and Andrews (1944).

    Comparing astronomy and planning provides a nice metaphor for two branches of econometrics. In

1943, before space flight, an astronomer might model a solar system to advance physical science, but the

effort could have no practical impact on decision making. An economist might similarly model an economy

to advance social science. However, an economist might also model to inform society about the

consequences of contemplated decisions that would change aspects of the economy.

    Haavelmo’s doctoral thesis (Haavelmo, 1944) proposed a probabilistic structure for econometrics that

aimed to make it useful for public decision making. To conclude, he wrote (p. 114-115):

        “In other quantitative sciences the discovery of “laws,” even in highly specialized fields, has moved
        from the private study into huge scientific laboratories where scores of experts are engaged, not
        only in carrying out actual measurements, but also in working out, with painstaking precision, the
        formulae to be tested and the plans for crucial experiments to be made. Should we expect less in
        economic research, if its results are to be the basis for economic policy upon which might depend
        billions of dollars of national income and the general economic welfare of millions of people?”
                                                      2


Haavelmo’s thesis made fundamental contributions that became thoroughly embedded in econometrics.

Nevertheless, it is unsurprising that it did not answer all the deep issues that the author raised. Notably,

Haavelmo struggled to formalize the implications for decision making of the fact that models only

approximate actuality. He called attention to this in his opening chapters on “Abstract Models and Reality”

and “The Degree of Permanence of Economic Laws,” but the later chapters did not resolve the matter.

     Haavelmo devoted a chapter to “The Testing of Hypotheses,” expositing the then recent work of

Neyman and Pearson (1928, 1933) and considering its potential use to evaluate the consistency of models

with observed data. Testing models subsequently became widespread, both as a topic of study in

econometric theory and as a practice in empirical research. However, Neyman-Pearson testing does not

provide satisfactory guidance for decision making. See Section 2.3 below.

     While Haavelmo was writing his thesis, Abraham Wald was initiating his own seminal development

of statistical decision theory in Wald (1939, 1945) and elsewhere, which culminated in his treatise (Wald,

1950). Wald’s work has broad potential application. Indeed, it implicitly provides a framework for

evaluation of the use of models in decision making. I say that Wald “implicitly” provides this framework

because, writing abstractly, he appears not to have explicitly examined decision making with models. Yet

it is straightforward to use statistical decision theory this way. Explaining this motivates the present paper.

     I find it intriguing to join the contributions of Haavelmo and Wald because they interacted in the

United States during the wartime period when both were developing their ideas. Wald came to the U.S. in

1938 as a refugee from Austria. Haavelmo arrived in 1939 for what was intended to be a short visit, but

which lasted the entire war when he could not return to occupied Norway. Bjerkholt (2007, 2015) describes

the many interactions of Haavelmo and Wald, not only at conferences but also in hiking expeditions.

     Haavelmo’s appreciation of Wald is clear. In the preface of Haavelmo (1944), he wrote (p. v):

        “My most sincere thanks are due to Professor Abraham Wald of Columbia University for numerous
        suggestions and for help on many points in preparing the manuscript. Upon his unique knowledge
        of modern statistical theory and mathematics in general I have drawn very heavily. Many of the
        statistical sections in this study have been formulated, and others have been reformulated, after
        discussions with him.”
                                                      3


The text of the thesis cites several of Wald’s papers. Most relevant is the final chapter on “Problems of

Prediction,” where Haavelmo suggests application of the framework in Wald (1939) to choose a predictor

of a random outcome. I discuss this in Section 4.1 below.

     Despite Haavelmo’s favorable citations of Wald=s ideas, econometrics did not embrace statistical

decision theory. Instead, it focused on identification, estimation, and statistical inference. No contribution

in Cowles Monograph 10 (Koopmans, 1950) mentions statistical decision theory. Only one does so briefly

in Cowles Monograph 14 (Hood and Koopmans, 1953). This appears in a chapter by Koopmans and Hood

(1953), who refer to estimates of structural parameters as “raw materials, to be processed further into

solutions of a wide variety of prediction problems.” See Section 4.1 for further discussion.

     Modern econometricians continue to view parameter estimates as “raw materials” that may be used to

solve decision problems. A widespread practice has been as-if optimization: specification of a model, point

estimation of its parameters, and use of the point estimate to make a decision that would be optimal if the

estimate were accurate. As-if optimization, also called plug-in or two-step decision making, has heuristic

appeal when a model is known to be correct but less so when the model may be incorrect.

     A huge hole in econometric theory has been the absence of a broadly applicable means to evaluate as-

if opti mization and other uses of econometric models in decision making. This paper proposes statistical

decision theory as a framework for evaluating the performance of models. I set forth the general idea and

apply it to two prevalent decision problems, prediction and treatment choice.

     Section 2 reviews basic elements of statistical decision theory and introduces notation used throughout

the paper. Section 3 shows how the Wald framework may be used to evaluate decision making with models.

One specifies a model space, which approximates the state space in some way. A model-based decision

uses the model space as if it were the state space. I consider the use of models to perform as-if optimization.

My theme is that one should evaluate as-if optimization or any other model-based decision rule by its

performance across the state space, not the model space. Thus, statistical decision theory embraces use of

both correct and incorrect models to make decisions. I relate this idea to research on estimation of

misspecified models, specification tests, and robust decisions, explaining the connections and differences.
                                                      4


     Sections 4 and 5 consider two decision problems that have long been central to econometrics,

prediction and treatment choice. Both subjects have drawn substantial attention from the conditional Bayes

perspective, but not nearly enough using the Wald framework. A small body of work has evaluated the

maximum regret of decision criteria. I present new computational findings on prediction and new analytical

and computational findings on treatment choice.

     Considered broadly, this paper adds to the argument made beginning in Manski (2000) and then in a

sequence of subsequent articles for application of Wald’s statistical decision theory to econometrics. A

group of econometricians have made recent contributions towards this objective. The main focus of this

work has been treatment choice with data from randomized trials, with contributions by Manski (2004,

2005, 2019), Hirano and Porter (2009, 2019), Stoye (2009, 2012), Manski and Tetenov (2016, 2019, 2021),

and Kitagawa and Tetenov (2018). Manski (2007) and Athey and Wager (2019) have studied treatment

choice with observational data. Chamberlain (2000a, 2007) and Chamberlain and Moreira (2009) have used

statistical decision theory to study estimation of some linear econometric models. Dominitz and Manski

(2017, 2021) have studied prediction with missing data.

     The original contributions made here are varied. New perspective on the history of econometric

thought permeates the paper. The idea proposed in Section 3---use of the Wald framework to evaluate as-

if optimization and other model-based decision rules, measuring performance across the state space rather

than model space---is obvious in retrospect. Yet it has not been widely appreciated. The paper reports new

analyses of prediction and treatment choice as statistical decision problems in Sections 4 and 5.

     Before we begin, I think it important to emphasize that Wald’s statistical decision theory is prescriptive

rather than descriptive. Prescriptive decision analysis seeks to develop reasonable, even if not optimal, ways

to make decisions under uncertainty. Descriptive analysis seeks to understand and predict how actual

decision makers behave. See Bell, Raiffa, and Tversky (1988) for extensive discussion of this important

distinction. This paper does not perform or discuss descriptive research on decision making.
                                                        5


2. Basic Elements of Statistical Decision Theory



     The Wald development of statistical decision theory directly addresses decision making with sample

data. Wald began with the standard problem of a planner (or decision maker or agent) who must choose an

action yielding welfare that depends on an unknown state of nature. The planner specifies a state space

listing the states considered possible. He chooses without knowing the true state.

     Wald added to this standard problem by supposing that the planner observes sample data that may be

informative about the true state. He studied choice of a statistical decision function (SDF), which maps

each potential data realization into a feasible action. He proposed evaluation of SDFs as procedures, chosen

ex ante, specifying how a planner would use whatever data are realized. Thus, Wald=s theory is frequentist.



2.1. Decisions Under Uncertainty



     I describe decision problems without sample data here and with such data next. Consider a planner

who must choose an action yielding welfare that varies with the state of nature. The planner has an objective

function and beliefs about the feasible values of the true state. These are considered primitives. He must

choose an action without knowing the true state.

     Formally, the planner faces choice set C and believes that the true state lies in set S, called the state

space. The objective function w(∙, ∙): C × S ⇾ R1 maps actions and states into welfare. The planner ideally

would maximize w(∙, s*), where s* is the true state. However, he only knows that s* ∈ S.

     The choice set is commonly considered to be predetermined. The welfare function and the state space

are subjective. The former formalizes what the planner wants to achieve, and the latter expresses the states

he believes could possibly occur. While the state space ultimately is subjective, its structure may use data

that are informative, eliminating some states as possibilities. This idea is central to analysis of identification.

     Haavelmo considered the state space to be a set of probability distributions that may possibly describe

the system under study. The Koopmans (1949) formalization of identification contemplated unlimited data
                                                       6


collection that enables one to shrink the state space, eliminating distributions that are inconsistent with the

information revealed by observation. The true state is point identified if maintained assumptions and the

observational process eliminate all but one distribution for the economic system. It is partially identified if

assumptions and observation eliminate some but not all distributions initially deemed possible.

      Given a welfare function and state space, a close to universally accepted prescription for decision

making is that choice should respect dominance. Action c ∈ C is weakly dominated if there exists a d ∈ C

such that w(d, s) ≥ w(c, s) for all s ∈ S and w(d, s) > w(c, s) for some s ∈ S. Even though the true state s* is

unknown, choice of d is certain to weakly improve on choice of c.

      There is no clearly best way to choose among undominated actions, but decision theorists have not

wanted to abandon the idea of optimization. So they have proposed various ways of using the objective

function w(, ∙) to form functions of actions alone, which can be optimized. In principle one should only

consider undominated actions, but it often is difficult to determine which actions are undominated. Hence,

in practice it is common to optimize over the full set of feasible actions. I define decision criteria

accordingly in this paper. I also use max and min notation, without concern for the mathematical subtleties

that sometimes make it necessary to use sup and inf operations.

      One idea is to place a subjective probability distribution on the state space, average state-dependent

welfare with respect to this distribution, and maximize the resulting function. This yields maximization of

subjective average welfare. Let π be the specified distribution on S. For each feasible action c, ∫w(c, s)dπ

is the mean of w(c, s) with respect to π. The criterion solves the problem



(1)    max ∫w(c, s)dπ.
        c∈C



      Another idea is to seek an action that, in some sense, works uniformly well over all elements of S. This

yields the maximin and minimax-regret (MMR) criteria. The maximin criterion maximizes the minimum

welfare attainable across the elements of S. For each feasible action c, consider the minimum feasible value

of w(c, s); that is, min s ∊ S w(c, s). A maximin rule chooses an action that solves
                                                       7




(2)       max     min w(c, s).
           c∈C    s∈S



      The MMR criterion chooses an action that minimizes the maximum loss to welfare that can result from

not knowing the true state. An MMR choice solves



(3)    min max [max w(d, s) − w(c, s)].
       c∈C s∈S     d∈C


Here max d ∊ C w(d, s) − w(c, s) is the regret of action c in state s; that is, the welfare loss associated with

choice of c relative to an action that maximizes welfare in state s. The true state being unknown, one

evaluates c by its maximum regret over all states and selects an action that minimizes maximum regret. The

maximum regret of an action measures its maximum distance from optimality across states. Hence, an

MMR choice is uniformly nearest to optimal among the feasible actions.

      A planner who asserts a partial subjective distribution on the state space, placing lower and upper

probabilities on states as in Dempster (1968) or Walley (1991), could maximize minimum subjective

average welfare or minimize maximum average regret. These hybrid criteria combine elements of averaging

across states and concern with uniform performance across states. Statistical decision theorists refer to these

criteria as Γ-maximin and Γ-minimax regret (Berger, 1985). The former has drawn attention from axiomatic

decision theorists, calling it maxmin expected utility (Gilboa and Schmeidler, 1989). See Chamberlain

(2000b) for an application in econometrics. I will confine discussion to the polar cases in which the planner

asserts a complete subjective distribution or none.



2.2. Statistical Decision Problems



      Statistical decision problems add to the above structure by supposing that the planner observes data

generated by some sampling distribution. Sample data may be informative but, unlike the unlimited data
                                                      8


contemplated in identification analysis, they do not enable one to shrink the state space.

     Knowledge of the sampling distribution is generally incomplete. To express this, one extends the

concept of the state space S to list the set of feasible sampling distributions, denoted (Qs, s ∈ S). Let Ψs

denote the sample space in state s; that is, Ψs is the set of samples that may be drawn under sampling

distribution Qs. The literature typically assumes that the sample space does not vary with s and is known. I

maintain this assumption and denote the sample space as Ψ, without the s subscript. Then a statistical

decision function c(): Ψ ⇾ C maps the sample data into a chosen action.

     Wald’s concept of a statistical decision function embraces all mappings [data → action]. An SDF need

not perform inference; that is, it need not use data to draw conclusions about the true state of nature. The

prominent decision criteria that have been studied −− maximin, minimax-regret, and maximization of

subjective average welfare −− do not refer to inference. The general absence of inference in statistical

decision theory is striking and has been noticed; see Neyman (1962) and Blyth (1970).

     Although SDFs need not perform inference, some do. That is, some have the sequential form [data →

inference → action], first performing inference and then using the inference to make a decision. There

seems to be no accepted term for such SDFs, so I call them inference-based.

     SDF c() is a deterministic function after realization of the sample data, but it is a random function ex

ante. Hence, the welfare achieved by c() is a random variable ex ante. Wald’s theory evaluates the

performance of c() in state s by Qs{w[c(ψ), s]}, the ex-ante distribution of welfare that it yields across

realizations ψ of the sampling process.

     It remains to ask how planners might compare the welfare distributions yielded by different SDFs.

Planners want to maximize welfare, so it seems self-evident that they should prefer SDF d() to c() in state

s if Qs{w[d(ψ), s]} stochastically dominates Qs{w[c(ψ), s]}. It is less obvious how they should compare

SDFs whose welfare distributions do not stochastically dominate one another.

     Wald proposed measurement of the performance of c() in state s by its expected welfare across

samples; that is, Es{w[c(ψ), s]}  ∫w[c(ψ), s]dQs. An alternative that has drawn only slight attention
                                                      9


measures performance by quantile welfare (Manski and Tetenov, 2014). Writing in a context where one

wants to minimize loss rather than maximize welfare, Wald used the term risk to denote the mean

performance of an SDF across samples.

      In practice, one does not know the true state. Hence, one evaluates c() by the state-dependent expected

welfare vector (Es{w[c(ψ), s]}, s ∈ S). Using the term inadmissible to denote weak dominance when

evaluating performance by risk, Wald recommended elimination of inadmissible SDFs from consideration.

As in decisions without sample data, there is no clearly best way to choose among admissible SDFs.

      Statistical decision theory has mainly studied the same decision criteria as has decision theory without

sample data. Let Γ be a specified set of feasible SDFs, each mapping Ψ ⇾ C. The statistical versions of

decision criteria (1), (2), and (3) are



(4)        max ∫Es{w[c(ψ), s]} dπ,
          c() ∈ Γ



(5)        max       min Es{w[c(ψ), s]},
          c() ∈ Γ   s∈S



(6)        min max ( max w(d, s) − Es{w[c(ψ), s]}).
         c() ∈ Γ s ∈ S    d∈C



An Appendix discusses these criteria further.



2.3. Binary Choice Problems



      SDFs for binary choice problems are simple and interesting. They can always be viewed as hypothesis

tests. Yet the Wald perspective on testing differs considerably from that of Neyman-Pearson.

      Let choice set C contain two actions, say {a, b}. A SDF c(∙) partitions Ψ into two regions that separate

the data yielding choice of each action. These are Ψc()a ≡ [ψ  Ψ: c(ψ) = a] and Ψc()b ≡ [ψ  Ψ: c(ψ) = b].
                                                        10


     A test motivated by the choice problem partitions state space S into two regions, say Sa and Sb, that

separate the states in which actions a and b are uniquely optimal. Thus, Sa contains the states [s ∈ S: w(a,

s) > w(b, s)] and Sb contains [s ∈ S: w(b, s) > w(a, s)]. The choice problem does not provide a rationale for

allocation of states in which the actions yield equal welfare. The standard practice is to give one action, say

a, a privileged status and to place all states yielding equal welfare in Sa. Then Sa ≡ [s ∈ S: w(a, s) ≥ w(b, s)]

and Sb ≡ [s ∈ S: w(b, s) > w(a, s)].

     In the language of testing, SDF c(∙) performs a test with acceptance regions Ψc(∙)a and Ψc(∙)b. When ψ ∈

Ψc(∙)a, c(∙) accepts the hypothesis {s ∈ Sa} by setting c(ψ) = a. When ψ ∈ Ψc(∙)b, c(∙) accepts the hypothesis

{s ∈ Sb} by setting c(ψ) = b. I use the word “accepts” rather than the traditional term “does not reject”

because choice of a or b is an affirmative action.

     Although all SDFs for binary choice are interpretable as tests, Neyman-Pearson testing and statistical

decision theory evaluate tests in different ways, explained below.



2.3.1. Neyman-Pearson Testing

     Neyman and Pearson (1928, 1933) tests view the states {s ∈ Sa} and {s ∈ Sb} asymmetrically, calling

the former the null hypothesis and the latter the alternative. The sampling probability of rejecting the null

when it is correct is the probability of a Type I error. A longstanding convention has been to restrict attention

to tests in which the probability of a Type I error is no larger than a predetermined value α, usually 0.05,

for all s ∈ Sa. Thus, one restricts attentions to SDFs c(∙) for which Qs[c(ψ) = b] ≤ α for all s ∈ Sa.

     Among tests that satisfy this restriction, it is thought desirable to use ones that have small probability

of rejecting the alternative hypothesis when it is correct, called the probability of a Type II error. However,

it generally is not possible to attain small probability of a Type II error for all s ∈ Sb. Letting S be a metric

space, the probability of Type II error typically approaches 1 − α as s ∈ Sb nears the boundary of Sa. The

practice has been to restrict attention to states in Sb that lie at least a specified distance from Sa. Let ρ be the
                                                       11


metric on S. Let ρa > 0 be the specified minimum distance from Sa. Neyman-Pearson testing seeks small

values for the maximum value of Qs[c(ψ) = a] over s ∈ Sb s. t. ρ(s, Sa) ≥ ρa.



2.3.2. Expected Welfare of Tests

      Decision theoretic evaluation of tests does not restrict attention to tests that yield a predetermined

upper bound on the probability of a Type I error. Nor does it aim to minimize the maximum value of the

probability of a Type II error when more than a specified minimum distance from the null hypothesis. Wald

proposed for binary choice, as elsewhere, evaluation of the performance of SDF c(∙) in state s by the

expected welfare that it yields across realizations of the sampling process. He first addressed testing this

way in Wald (1939).

      The welfare distribution in state s in a binary choice problem is Bernoulli, with mass points max [w(a,

s), w(b, s)] and min [w(a, s), w(b, s)]. These coincide if w(a, s) = w(b, s). When w(a, s) ≠ w(b, s), let Rc(∙)s

denote the probability that c(∙) yields an error, choosing the inferior action over the superior one. That is,



(7)          Rc(∙)s = Qs[c(ψ) = b] if w(a, s) > w(b, s),

                   = Qs[c(ψ) = a] if w(b, s) > w(a, s).



The former and latter are the probabilities of Type I and Type II errors.

      The probabilities that welfare equals max [w(a, s), w(b, s)] and min [w(a, s), w(b, s)] are 1 − Rc(∙)s and

Rc(∙)s. Hence, expected welfare in state s is



(8)       Es{w[c(ψ), s]} = Rc(∙)s{min [w(a, s), w(b, s)]} + [1 − Rc(∙)s]{max [w(a, s), w(b, s)]}


                          = max [w(a, s), w(b, s)] − Rc(∙)s|w(a, s) − w(b, s)|.
                                                        12


The expression Rc(∙)s|w(a, s) − w(b, s)| is the regret of c(∙) in state s. Thus, regret is the product of the error

probability and the magnitude of the welfare loss when an error occurs.

     Evaluation of tests by expected welfare constitutes a fundamental difference between the perspectives

of Wald and Neyman-Pearson. Planners should care about more than the probabilities of Type I and II error.

They should care as well about the magnitudes of the losses to welfare that arise when errors occur. A given

error probability should be less acceptable when the welfare difference between actions is larger. Neyman-

Pearson theory does not recognize this.

     Computation of regret in a specified state is usually tractable. The welfare magnitudes w(a, s) and w(b,

s) are usually easy to compute. The error probability Rc(∙)s may not have an explicit form, but it can be

approximated to any desired precision by Monte Carlo integration. One draws repeated pseudo-realizations

of ψ from distribution Qs, computes the fraction of cases in which the resulting c(ψ) selects the inferior

action, and uses this to estimate Rc(∙)s.

     Whereas computation of regret in one state is tractable, computation of maximum regret across all

feasible states may be burdensome. The state space commonly is uncountable in applications. A pragmatic

process for coping with uncountable state spaces is to discretize the space, computing regret on a finite

subset of states that reasonably approximate the full state space.



2.3.3. Maximum Regret of Medical Decisions using Neyman-Pearson Tests and the Empirical Success Rule

     Medical decision making illustrates well the difference between Neyman-Pearson testing and

statistical decision theory. A core objective of randomized trials comparing medical treatments is to inform

treatment choice. Often the objective is to compare an existing treatment, called standard care, with an

innovation. The prevailing statistical practice has been to conclude that the innovation is better than

standard care only if a Neyman-Pearson test rejects the null hypothesis that the innovation is no better than

standard care.

     Manski and Tetenov (2016, 2019, 2020) compare the maximum regret of treatment choice using

common Neyman-Pearson tests with decisions using the empirical success rule, which chooses a treatment
                                                      13


that maximizes the average sample outcome in the trial. The simplest context is choice between two

treatments, t = a and t = b, when the outcome of interest is binary, y(t) = 1 denoting success and y(t) = 0

failure. State s indexes a possible value for the pair of outcome probabilities {Ps[y(a) = 1], Ps[y(b) = 1]}.

The welfare yielded by treatment t in state s is w(t, s) = Ps[y(t) = 1]. The regret of SDF c() in state s is

Rc()s|Ps[y(a) = 1] − Ps[y(b) = 1]|.

     We suppose that the planner has no a priori knowledge of the outcome probabilities. Hence, the state

space is [0, 1]2. We approximate maximum regret by computing regret over a grid of states, discretizing the

state space. Examining a wide range of sample sizes and designs, we find that the empirical success rule

yields results that are always much closer to optimal than those generated by common tests.



3. Decision Making with Models



3.1. Basic Ideas



     I stated at the outset that decision theory begins with a planner who specifies a state space listing the

states considered possible. Thus, the state space should include all states that the planner believes feasible

and no others. The state space may be a large set that is difficult to contemplate in its entirety. Hence, it is

common to make decisions using a model.

     The word “model” is used informally to connote a simplification or approximation of reality. Formally,

a model specifies an alternative to the state space. Thus, model m replaces S with a model space Sm. A

planner using a model acts as if the model space is the state space. The planner might solve problem (4),

(5), or (6) with Sm replacing S. Section 3.2 discusses another approach, as-if optimization.

     The states contained in a model space may or may not be elements of the state space. George Box

famously wrote (Box, 1979): “All models are wrong, but some are useful.” The phrase “all models are

wrong” indicates that Box was thinking of models that simplify or approximate reality in a way that one

believes could not possibly be correct; then Sm ∩ S = Ø. On the other hand, researchers often use models
                                                        14


that they believe could be correct but are not necessarily so; then Sm ⊂ S. Economists have long used models

of the second type. They have sought to evaluate such models in various ways.

     A common practice when using models to predict macroeconomic outcomes is to compare predictions

with observed realizations, judging the usefulness of models by the accuracy of the predictions (e.g.,

Diebold, 2015; Patton, 2019). Measurement of accuracy requires selection of a loss function, typically

square or absolute loss. This connects empirical practice with decision theory. However, model evaluation

is performed ex post, with respect to observed outcomes, rather than ex ante as in statistical decision theory.

This makes the practice fundamentally different.

     A common practice in econometric theory poses an estimator that consistently estimates a well-defined

estimand when a specified model is correct and characterizes the estimand to which the estimate converges

when the model is incorrect in some sense. For example, Goldberger (1968) observed that the least squares

estimate of a linear regression model converges to the best linear predictor of y on x if E(y|x) is not a linear

function of x. White (1982) observed that the maximum likelihood estimate of a model converges to the

parameter that minimizes the Kullback-Leibler information criterion if the model is incorrect. Imbens and

Angrist (1994) showed that an instrumental-variables estimate of a model of linear homogeneous treatment

response converges to a local-average treatment effect if this model is incorrect but a certain monotonicity

assumption holds. Historically, research of this type has not been connected to statistical decision theory.

     A persistent concern of econometric theory has been to determine when models have implications that

may potentially be inconsistent with observable data. These models are called testable, refutable, or over-

identified. Working within the Neyman-Pearson paradigm, econometricians have developed specification

tests, which take the null hypothesis to be that the model is correct and the alternative to be that it is incorrect

(e.g., Hausman, 1978; White, 1982). Formally, the null is {s* ∈ Sm} and the alternative is {s* ∉ Sm}.

However, econometricians have struggled to answer a central question raised by Haavelmo (1944) in his

opening chapter on “Abstract Models and Reality” and restated succinctly by Masten and Poirier (2021).

The latter write (p. 1): “What should researchers do when their baseline model is refuted?” They discuss

the many ways that econometricians have sought to answer the question, and they offer new suggestions.
                                                       15


     The literatures cited above have not sought to evaluate the ex-ante performance of models in decision

making. Statistical decision theory accomplishes this in a straightforward way. What matters is the SDF,

say cm(∙), that one chooses using a model. As with any SDF, one measures the performance of cm(∙) by its

vector of state-dependent expected welfares (Es{w[cm(ψ), s]}, s ∈ S). The relevant states for evaluation of

performance are those in the state space S, not those in the model space Sm.

     Thus, statistical decision theory operationalizes Box=s assertion that some models are useful. One

should not make an abstract assertion that a model is or is not useful. Usefulness depends on the decision

context. Useful model-based decision rules yield acceptably high state-dependent expected welfare across

the state space, relative to what is possible in principle.



3.1.1. Research on Robust Decisions

     The remainder of this paper fleshes out the above ideas on evaluation of model-based decisions. Before

then, I juxtapose these ideas with those expressed in related research on robust decisions. This includes the

statistical literature on robust estimation and prediction (e.g., Huber, 1964, 1981; Hampel et. al., 1986), the

engineering literature on robust control (e.g., Zhou, Doyle, and Glover, 1996), and econometric work on

robust macroeconomic modeling (e.g., Hansen and Sargent, 2001, 2008). The idea that the usefulness of a

model depends on the decision context has been appreciated in research on robust decisions. A review

article by Watson and Holmes (2016) states (p. 466):

        “Statisticians are taught from an early stage that “essentially, all models are wrong, but some are
        useful” (Box and Draper, 1987). By “wrong” we will take to mean misspecified and by “useful”
        we will take to mean helpful for aiding actions (taking decisions), or rather a model is not useful if
        it does not aid any decision.”
     Research on robust decisions proceeds in a different manner than does statistical decision theory.

Rather than begin with specification of a state space, it begins with specification of a model. Having

specified the model, a researcher may be concerned that it is not correct. To recognize this possibility, the

researcher enlarges the model space locally, using a specified metric to generate a neighborhood of the

model space. He then acts as if the locally enlarged model space is correct. Watson and Holmes write (p.
                                                      16


465): “We then consider formal methods for decision making under model misspecification by quantifying

stability of optimal actions to perturbations to the model within a neighbourhood of [the] model space.”

     Although research on robust decisions differs procedurally from statistical decision theory, one can

subsume the former within the latter if one considers the locally enlarged model space to be the state space.

It is unclear how often this perspective characterizes what researchers have in mind. Published articles often

do not state explicitly whether the constructed neighborhood of the model space encompasses all states that

authors deem sufficiently feasible to warrant formal consideration. The models specified in robust decision

analyses often make strong assumptions and the generated neighborhoods often relax these assumptions

only modestly.



3.2. As-If Optimization



     A familiar econometric practice specifies a model space, typically called the parameter space. Sample

data are used to select a point in the parameter space, called a point estimate of the parameter. The estimation

method is motivated by desirable statistical properties that hold if the true state lies within the model space.

     As-if optimization chooses an action that optimizes welfare as if the estimate is the true state.

Econometricians often use the term “plug-in” or “two-step” rather than “as-if.” I prefer “as-if,” which makes

explicit that one acts as if the model is correct. Discussion of as-if optimization has a long history. A

prominent case is the Friedman and Savage (1948) discussion of as-if expected utility maximization.

     As-if optimization is a type of inference-based SDF. Whereas Wald supposed that a planner both

performs research and makes a decision, in practice there commonly is separation between the two.

Researchers report inferences and planners use them to make decisions. Thus, planners perform the

mapping [inference  decision] rather than the more basic mapping [data  decision]. Having researchers

report estimates and planners use them as if they are accurate exemplifies this process.
                                                      17


     Formally, a point estimate is a function s(): Ψ ⇾ Sm that maps data into the model space. As-if

optimization means solution of the problem max c ∊ C w[c, s(ψ)]. When as-if optimization yields multiple

solutions, one may use some auxiliary rule to choose among them. The result is an SDF c[s()], where



(9) c[s(ψ)] ∈ argmax w[c, s(ψ)],        ψ ∈ Ψ.
                   c∈C



     A rationale for solving (9) is that selecting a point estimate and using it to maximize welfare is easier

than solving problems (4) to (6). However, computational appeal cannot justify this approach to decision

making. To motivate as-if optimization, econometricians often cite limit theorems of asymptotic theory that

hold if the model is correct. They hypothesize a sequence of sampling processes indexed by sample size N

and a corresponding sequence of point estimates sN(): ΨN ⇾ Sm. They show that the sequence is consistent

when specified assumptions hold. That is, sN(ψ) ⇾ s* as N ⇾ , in probability or almost surely. They may

prove further results regarding rate of convergence and the limiting distribution of the estimate.

     Asymptotic arguments may be suggestive, but they do not prove that as-if optimization provides a

well-performing SDF. Statistical decision theory evaluates as-if optimization in state s by the expected

welfare Es{w{c[s(ψ)], s}} that it yields across samples of size N, not asymptotically. It calls for study of

expected welfare across the state space, not the model space.



3.2.1. As-If Optimization with Analog Estimates

     Econometric research from Haavelmo onward has focused to a considerable degree on a class of

problems that connect the state space and the sampling distribution in a simple way. These are problems in

which states are probability distributions and the data are a random sample drawn from the true distribution.

In such problems, a natural form of as-if optimization is to act as if the empirical distribution of the data is

the true population distribution. Thus, one specifies the model space as the set of all possible empirical

distributions and uses the observed empirical distribution as the estimate of the true state.
                                                            18


       Goldberger (1968) called this the analogy principle. He wrote (p. 4): “The analogy principle of

estimation . . . . proposes that population parameters be estimated by sample statistics which have the same

property in the sample as the parameters do in the population.” The empirical distribution consistently

estimates the population distribution and has further desirable properties. This suggests decision making

using the empirical distribution as if it were the true population distribution.



3.2.2. As-If Decisions with Set Estimates

       As-if optimization uses data to compute a point estimate of the true state and chooses an action that

optimizes welfare as if this estimate is accurate. An obvious, but rarely applied, extension is to use data to

compute a set-valued estimate and act as if the set estimate is accurate. Whereas a point estimate s(∙) maps

data into an element of Sm, a set estimate S(∙) maps data into a subset of Sm.

       For example, S(∙) could be a confidence set or an analog estimate of the identification region for a

partially identified state. Sections 4.2 and 5.3 apply the latter idea to prediction and treatment choice.

Decision making using confidence sets as set estimates is a topic for future research. 1

       Given data ψ, one could act as if the state space is S(ψ) rather than the larger set S. Specifically, one

could solve these data-dependent versions of problems (1) through (3):



(1')         max ∫w(c, s)dπ(ψ),
             c∈C



(2')         max     min w(c, s),
             c∈C     s ∈ S(ψ)



(3')         min    max [max w(d, s) − w(c, s)].
             c∈C    s ∈ S(ψ)    d∈C




1
 A confidence set with coverage probability α is a set estimate S(⋅) such that Qs[ψ: s ∈ S(ψ)] ≥ α , all s ∈ S. Researchers
have used confidence sets to quantify imprecision of inference, without reference to decision problems. Nevertheless,
they could be used to make as-if decisions. When studying this possibility, I expect that it will be productive to abandon
the conventional practice of a priori fixing the coverage probability of a confidence set. This practice mirrors Neyman-
Pearson testing, which restricts attention to test statistics that yield at most a specified probability of Type I error.
                                                           19


In the case of (1'), π(ψ) is a subjective distribution on the set S(ψ).

     These as-if problems are generally easier to solve than problems (4) to (6). The as-if problems fix ψ

and select one action c, whereas problems (4) to (6) require one to consider all potential samples and choose

a decision function c(). The as-if problems compute welfare values w(c, s), whereas (4) to (6) compute

more complex expected welfare values Es{w[c(ψ), s]}. 2

     It is important not to confuse as-if decision making with set estimates, as described here, with

sensitivity analysis, which does not apply statistical decision theory. A sensitivity analysis computes

multiple point estimates under alternative assumptions. One then performs as-if optimization with each

estimate, yielding alternative decisions. When the multiple estimates or decisions coincide, researchers may

state that the result is “robust,” although this meaning of “robust” differs from that in Section 3.1.1. When

sensitivity analysis yields multiple disparate decisions, it does not offer a prescription for decision making.



4. Prediction with Sample Data



4.1. Haavelmo on Prediction



     A familiar case of as-if optimization occurs when states are distributions for a real random variable

and the decision is to predict the value of a realization drawn from the true distribution. When welfare is

measured by square and absolute loss, the best predictors in each state are well-known to be the population

mean and median. When the true distribution is not known but data from a random sample are observed,

the analogy principle suggests use of the sample average and median as predictors.




2
  An alternative approach replaces S by S(ψ) in the middle operations of (4) to (6), but it does not replace Es{w[c(ψ),
s]} by w(c, s) in the innermost operations. This simplifies (4) to (6) by shrinking the state space over which the middle
operations are performed. However, it is more complex than (1) to (3) for two reasons. It requires choice of a decision
function c() rather than a single action c, and it must compute Es{w[c(ψ), s]} rather than w(c, s). Chamberlain (2000a)
used asymptotic considerations to suggest this type of as-if decision and presented an application.
                                                         20


     In his chapter on “Problems of Prediction,” Haavelmo (1944) questioned this common application of

as-if optimization and instead recommended application of the Wald theory. In his section on “General

Formulation of the Problem of Prediction,” he wrote (p. 109): “We see therefore that the seemingly logical

‘two-step’ procedure of first estimating the unknown distribution of the variables to be predicted and then

using this estimate to derive a prediction formula for the variables may not be very efficient.” Citing Wald

(1939), he proposed computation of the state-dependent risk for any proposed predictor function.

     Letting E2 denote a predictor function and (x1, x2, . . , , xN) be the sample data, he wrote (p. 109): “We

have to choose E2 as a function of x1, x2, . . , , xN, and we should, naturally, try to choose E2(x1, x2, . . , , xN)

in such a way that r (the ‘risk’) becomes as small as possible.” He recognized that there generally does not

exist a predictor function that minimizes risk across all states of nature. Hence, he suggested a feasible

approach. I quote in full this key passage, which uses the notation Ω1 to denote the state space (p. 116):

        “In general, however, we may expect that no uniformly best prediction function exists. Then we
        have to introduce some additional principles in order to choose a prediction function. We may then,
        first, obviously disregard all those prediction functions that are such that there exists another
        prediction function that makes r smaller for every member of Ω1. If this is not the case we call the
        prediction function considered an admissible prediction function. To choose between several
        admissible prediction functions we might adopt the following principle, introduced by Wald: For
        every admissible prediction function E2 the ‘risk’ r is a function of the true distribution p. Consider
        that prediction function E2, among the admissible ones, for which the largest value of r is at a
         minimum (i.e., smaller than or at most equal to the largest value of r for any other admissible E2).
         Such a prediction function, if it exists, may be said to be the least risky among the admissible
         prediction functions.”
Thus, following Wald, Haavelmo suggested elimination of inadmissible predictors followed by choice of a

minimax predictor among those that are admissible.

     It may be that econometrics would have progressed to make productive use of statistical decision

theory if Haavelmo had been able to pursue this idea further. However, in his next section on “Some

Practical Suggestions for the Derivation of Prediction Formulae,” he cautioned regarding the practicality
                                                      21


of the idea, writing (p. 111): “The apparatus set up in the preceding section, although simple in principle,

will in general involve considerable mathematical problems and heavy algebra.”

    Aiming for tractability, Haavelmo sketched an example of as-if optimization. He noted that one could

study the state-dependent risk of the resulting SDF, but he did not provide analysis. With this, his chapter

on prediction ended. Thus, Haavelmo initiated econometric consideration of statistical decision theory but,

stymied by computational intractability, he found himself unable to follow through.

    Nor did other econometricians follow through in the period after publication of Haavelmo (1944). I

observed earlier that no contribution in Cowles Monograph 10 mentioned statistical decision theory and

only one did so briefly in Cowles 14. Cowles 10 and 14 contain several chapters by Haavelmo and by Wald,

but these concern different subjects. The only mention in Cowles 14 appeared in Koopmans and Hood

(1953). Considering “The Purpose of Estimation,” they wrote (p. 127):

        “if a direct prediction problem . . . . can be isolated and specified, the choice of a method of
        estimation should be discussed in terms of desired properties of the joint distribution of the
        prediction(s) made and the realized values(s) of the variables(s) predicted. In particular, in a
        precisely defined prediction problem of this type, one may know the consequence of various
        possible errors of prediction and would then be able to use predictors minimizing the mathematical
        expectation of losses due to such errors. Abraham Wald [1939, 1945, 1950c], among others, has
        proposed methods of statistical decision-making designed to accomplish this.”
However, they went on to state that neither they nor other contributors to Cowles 14 apply statistical

decision theory to prediction. They wrote (p. 127):

        “The more classical methods of estimation applied in this volume are not as closely tailored to any
        one particular prediction problem. Directed to the estimation of structural parameters rather than
        values of endogenous variables, they yield estimates that can be regarded as raw materials, to be
        processed further into solutions of a wide variety of prediction problems---in particular, problems
        involving prediction of the effects of known changes in structure.”
This passage expresses the broad thinking that econometricians have used to motivate as-if optimization.
                                                     22


4.2. Prediction under Square Loss



     Haavelmo discussed application of statistical decision theory to prediction abstractly. Subsequent

research using the Wald theory has focused on the case of square loss. Here the risk of a candidate predictor

using sample data is the sum of the population variance of the outcome and the mean square error (MSE)

of the predictor as an estimate of the mean outcome. The regret of a predictor is its MSE as an estimate of

the mean. An MMR predictor minimizes maximum MSE. MMR prediction of the outcome is equivalent to

minimax estimation of the population mean.

     One of the earliest practical findings of statistical decision theory was reported by Hodges and

Lehmann (1950). They derived the MMR predictor under square loss with data from a random sample,

when the outcome has known bounded range and all sample data are observed. They assumed no knowledge

of the shape of the outcome distribution. Let the outcome range be [0, 1]. Then the MMR predictor is (μN√N

+ ½)/(√N + 1), where N is sample size and μN is the sample average outcome.



4.2.1. Prediction with Missing Data: Known Observability Rate

     Extending the analysis of Hodges and Lehmann, Dominitz and Manski (2017, 2021) have studied

prediction of bounded outcomes under square loss when some outcome data are missing. The former article

concerns prediction of a scalar outcome. The latter studies prediction of bounded real functions of two-

dimensional outcomes when data may be missing for one or both outcomes. I focus on the former case here.

     It is challenging to determine the MMR predictor when data are missing. Seeking a tractable approach,

we studied as-if MMR prediction. The analysis assumed knowledge of the population rate of observing

outcomes, but no knowledge of the distributions of observed and missing outcomes. It used the empirical

distribution of the observed data as if it were the population distribution of observable outcomes. Let K be

the number of observed outcomes, which is fixed rather than random under the assumed survey design.

     With no knowledge of the distribution of missing outcomes, the population mean is partially identified

when the outcome is bounded. Let y be the outcome, normalized to lie in the [0, 1] interval. Let δ indicate
                                                       23


observability of an outcome, P(δ = 1) and P(δ = 0) being the fractions of the population whose outcomes

are and are not observable. Manski (1989) showed that the identification region for E(y) is the interval

[E(y|δ = 1)P(δ = 1), E(y|δ = 1)P(δ = 1) + P(δ = 0)].

     If this interval were known, the MMR predictor would be its midpoint E(y|δ = 1)P(δ = 1) + ½P(δ = 0).

The interval is not known with sample data, but one can compute its sample analog and use its midpoint

EK(y|δ = 1)P(δ = 1) + ½P(δ = 0) as the predictor. This midpoint predictor is easy to compute. Dominitz and

Manski (2017) showed that its maximum regret is ¼[P(δ = 1)2/K + P(δ = 0)2].



4.2.2. Prediction with Missing Data: Unknown Observability Rate

     The above analysis assumes knowledge of the population rate of observable outcomes. A midpoint

predictor remains computable when P(δ) is not known and instead is estimated by its sample analog.

Derivation of an analytical expression for maximum regret appears intractable, but numerical computation

is feasible. Manski and Tabord-Meehan (2017) documents an algorithm coded in STATA for numerical

computation of the maximum regret of the midpoint predictor and other user-specified predictors.

     The program is applicable when y is binary or is distributed continuously. In the latter case, Ps(y|δ =

1) and Ps(y|δ = 0) are approximated by Beta distributions. Subject to these restrictions on the shapes of

outcome distributions, the user can specify the state space flexibly. For example, one may assume that

nonresponse will be no higher than 80% or that the mean value of the outcome for nonresponders will be

no lower than 0.5. One may impose no restrictions connecting the distributions Ps(y|δ = 1) and Ps(y|δ = 0),

or one may bound the difference between these distributions.

     Whereas Dominitz and Manski (2017) assumed a sampling process in which the number K of observed

outcomes is fixed, the algorithm considers a process in which one draws at random a fixed number N of

population members and sees the values of the observable outcomes. Hence, the number of observed

outcomes is random rather than fixed. The midpoint predictor is EN(y|δ = 1)PN(δ = 1) + ½PN(δ = 0). This is

an unbiased and consistent estimate of the midpoint of the identification region for E(y).
                                                          24


     Table 1 uses the program to compute the maximum regret of the midpoint predictor when y is binary.

Table 2 displays maximum regret for prediction by the sample average of observed outcomes, a predictor

commonly used when researchers assume that data are missing at random. Panels A and B of each table

differ in their specification of the feasible outcome distributions. All distributions are feasible in Panel A.

Panel B bounds the difference between the distributions of observed and missing outcomes, assuming that

−½ ≤ P(y = 1|δ = 1) − P(y = 1|δ = 0) ≤ ½. Thus, prediction poses a severe identification problem in Panel

A, with data on observed outcomes revealing nothing about the distribution of missing data. The problem

is less severe in Panel B, where the assumption constrains the distance between the two outcome

distributions. Statistical imprecision is a problem in both cases, its severity diminishing with sample size.

     Each row of a table specifies a sample size, in increments of 25 from 25 to 100. Each column is a value

of the observability rate, in increments of 0.1, from 0.1 to 1. Given N and P(δ = 1), the cell gives the

approximate value of maximum MSE across feasible pairs of conditional outcome distributions. In each

state of nature, MSE is approximated by Monte Carlo integration across 5000 simulated samples. 3

Maximum MSE across feasible outcome distributions is approximated by maximizing over a uniform grid

of 100 values for each of the Bernoulli parameters Ps(y = 1|δ = 1) and Ps(y = 1|δ = 0). 4 Someone who does

not know P(δ = 1) but who finds it credible to bound it can approximate maximum regret at a specified

sample size by the maximum entry across the relevant column cells of the table.

     To interpret the entries in the tables, keep in mind that the maximum MSE of a predictor is determined

by both statistical imprecision and the identification problem created by missing data. Maximum variance

decreases with sample size N. Maximum squared bias decreases with the observability rate P(δ = 1).




3
  To create a simulated sample, the program draws N observations {δi, i = 1, . . . , N} from the distribution Ps(δ). Let
K = ∑ i δi. It draws K observations {yi, i = 1, . . , K} at random from Ps(y|δ = 1). It is possible that K = 0, so the
specified predictor must be defined for this case. The program uses the N simulated realizations of δ and the K
realizations of y to compute a simulated value of the predictor. For a specified positive integer T, the program repeats
the above T times and uses the T simulated values of the predictor to approximate its MSE in state s.

4
  Computation of regret on a finite grid of states implies that computed maximum regret is less than or equal to true
maximum regret, with equality attained if the grid contains the state yielding true maximum regret. The accuracy of
the approximation may be improved by increasing grid density, at the expense of increased computation time.
                                                     25


     Table 1A shows that identification is the dominant inferential problem when the observability rate is

less than 0.7. For all sample sizes from 25 to 100, computed maximum MSE is close to ¼P(δ = 0)2, the

value of maximum squared bias. Imprecision is a more noticeable contributor to maximum MSE when the

observability rate exceeds 0.7. When the observability rate is 1, imprecision is the sole problem.

     Table 1B constrains the state space to distributions satisfying −½ ≤ P(y = 1|δ = 1) − P(y = 1|δ = 0) ≤

½. This mitigates the identification problem, yet the entries in Table 1B are essentially the same as in Table

1A. The explanation is that the states of nature generating maximum MSE when all distributions are feasible

remain within the state space when the constraint is imposed. For all values of the observability rate,

maximum MSE in Table 1A occurs when P(y = 1|δ = 1) = ½ and P(y = 1|δ = 0) equals either 0 or 1. These

states are in the constrained state space of Table 1B. Hence, maximum MSE does not change.

     Comparison of Tables 1A and 2A shows that, when all outcome distributions are feasible, the midpoint

predictor always outperforms prediction by the sample average of observed outcomes. The maximum MSE

of the former predictor is approximately ¼ the size of the latter when the observability rate is less than or

equal to 0.8, and about ½ the size in the larger samples when the observability rate is 0.9. Constraining the

state space in Table 2B changes the states that maximize regret for the sample-average predictor, improving

its performance substantially.



5. Treatment Choice with Sample Data



5.1. Background



     Econometricians and statisticians have studied treatment response in randomized trials and

observational settings. Some research performs causal inference, without study of a decision problem.

Some aims to inform treatment choice. I am concerned with the latter. The many areas of important

application across the planet range from medical and other health-related treatment to educational and labor

market interventions.
                                                      26


     I use the formalization of Manski (2004). States of nature are possible distributions of treatment

response for a population of observationally identical persons who are subject to treatment. The term

“observationally identical” means that these persons share the same observed covariates. Groups of persons

with different observed covariates are considered as separate populations.

     The problem is to choose treatments for the population. Treatment response is assumed individualistic;

that is, each person’s outcome may depend on the treatment he receives but not on treatments received by

others. Welfare is the mean outcome across the population, as in utilitarian welfare economics.

     Optimal treatment is infeasible because the true distribution of treatment response is not known.

Decision making uses data on the outcomes realized by a sample of the population. Some research studies

data from randomized trials, and some studies observational data. Either way, statistical decision theory

may be used to evaluate the performance of SDFs, called statistical treatment rules in this context.

     A simple way to use sample data is as-if optimization. Applying the analogy principle, one acts as if

the empirical outcome distribution for each treatment equals its population outcome distribution. Emulating

the fact that it is optimal to chooses a treatment that maximizes the mean population outcome, one chooses

a treatment that maximizes the average sample outcome. This is the empirical success (ES) rule.

     When analyzing data from randomized trials, econometricians and statisticians have long used

asymptotic arguments to motivate the ES rule, citing laws of large numbers and central limit theorems. A

growing recent econometric literature has studied the maximum regret of the ES rule with trial data.

     Consider an ideal randomized trial, where all subjects comply with assigned treatments and all realized

outcomes are observed. Moreover, assume the distribution of treatment response is the same as in the

population to be treated. Then the feasible states of nature are ones where, for each treatment, the population

distribution of counterfactual outcomes equals that of realized outcomes.

     Manski (2004) used a large-deviations inequality for sample averages of bounded outcomes to derive

an upper bound on the maximum regret of the ES rule in problems of choice between two treatments.

Generalizing to problems with multiple treatments, Manski and Tetenov (2016) used large deviations

inequalities to bound the maximum regret of the ES rule. Stoye (2009) showed that in trials with moderate
                                                         27


sample size, the ES rule either exactly or approximately minimizes maximum regret in cases with two

treatments and a balanced design. Hirano and Porter (2009, 2019) showed that the ES rule is asymptotically

optimal in a formal decision-theoretic sense. Manski and Tetenov (2016, 2019, 2021) developed algorithms

for numerical computation of the maximum regret of the ES rule when outcomes are binary. Kitagawa and

Tetenov (2018) studied a generalization of the ES rule, called empirical welfare maximization, intended for

application when the set of feasible treatment policies is constrained in various ways. Also see the early

related work on empirical risk minimization (e.g., Vapnik, 1999).

     Econometricians have long analyzed data on realized treatments and outcomes in settings where

treatments are chosen purposefully rather than randomly. Haavelmo (1944) put it this way (p. 7): “the

economist is usually a rather passive observer with respect to important economic phenomena; he usually

does not control the actual collection of economic statistics. He is not in a position to enforce the

prescriptions of his own designs of ideal experiments.”

     An important contribution of early econometrics was to recognize that, when treatments are chosen

purposefully, distributions of counterfactual and realized outcomes need not coincide. 5 Haavelmo (1943)

showed this in the context of a linear model with homogeneous treatment response and the subsequent

literature has generalized the finding substantially. Wanting to avoid the assumption of random treatment

selection, econometricians have studied many models that use other assumptions to point-identify

distributions of treatment response.

     Recent applications of Wald’s statistical decision theory to treatment choice have mainly studied

decision making with data from ideal trials. Exceptions are Manski (2007), Stoye (2012), and Athey and

Wager (2019), each of which studies maximum regret for rules that choose between two treatments. Manski

(2007) studied trials with selective attrition and treatment choice with observational data. Stoye (2012)



5
  The term “analysis of treatment response” has become widespread since the 1990s, but it was not used in early
writing on econometrics. A central focus was identification and estimation of models of jointly determined treatments
and outcomes. The mathematical notation typically defined symbols only for realized treatments and outcomes,
leaving implicit the idea of potential outcomes under counterfactual treatments. See Manski (1995, Chapter 6) and
Angrist, Graddy, and Imbens (2000) for discussions that connect the early and recent literatures.
                                                     28


examined trials with some forms of imperfect internal or external validity. Athey and Wager (2019) studied

choice with observational data when the set of feasible treatment policies is constrained in various ways.

Whereas Manski (2007) and Stoye (2012) provided finite-sample analysis in settings where average

treatment effects are partially identified, Athey and Wager performed asymptotic analysis under

assumptions that give point identification.

     This paper presents new analysis of the maximum regret of rules for treatment with observational data

when average treatment effects are partially identified. Section 5.2 develops algebraic findings for the limit

case where one knows the distribution of realized outcomes in the study population. Section 5.3 reports

numerical findings for treatment with sample data.



5.2. Treatment Choice with Knowledge of the Distribution of Realized Outcomes



     I consider an observational study with two treatments {a, b} and outcomes taking values in [0, 1]. Each

member of the study population has potential outcomes [y(a), y(b)]. Binary indicators [δ(a), δ(b)] denote

whether these outcomes are observable. Realized outcomes are observable, but counterfactual ones are not,

so the possible indicator values are [δ(a) = 1, δ(b) = 0] and [δ(a) = 0, δ(b) = 1]. State s denotes a possible

distribution Ps[y(a), y(b), δ(a), δ(b)] of outcomes and observability. The problem is to choose between a

and b in a treatment population with the same distribution of treatment response as the study population.

     Given that realized outcomes are observed and counterfactual ones are not, P[δ(a) = 1] + P[δ(b) = 1]

= 1. I use the notation p ≡ P[δ(b) = 1], with P[δ(a) = 1] = 1 – p. If 0 < p < 1, observation asymptotically

reveals the true values of P[y(a)|δ(a) = 1], P[y(b)|δ(b) = 1], and p. Observation is uninformative about the

counterfactual distributions P[y(a)|δ(a) = 0] and P[y(b)|δ(b) = 0]. This limit setting has been studied in

partial identification analysis of treatment response, as in Manski (1990). I proceed likewise here.
                                                       29


5.2.1. MMR Treatment Choice

       Manski (2007), Proposition 1 proved a simple result that holds when the planner can make a fractional

treatment allocation, assigning fraction z ∊ [0, 1] of the treatment population to treatment b and 1 – z to

treatment a. Let all distributions of realized and counterfactual outcome distributions be feasible. Let

P[y(a)|δ(a) = 1], P[y(b)|δ(b) = 1], and p be known. Then the unique MMR allocation is



(10)       zMMR = E[y(b)|δ(b) = 1]∙p + {1 − E[y(a)|δ(a) = 1]}(1 – p).



Its maximum regret is zMMR(1 − zMMR).

       It is often the case that a planner cannot make a fractional allocation, being constrained by laws or by

norms calling for “equal treatment of equals” to provide the same treatment to all members of the

population; see Manski (2009). Moreover, a planner may be constrained to use a deterministic rather than

randomized treatment rule. Thus, the planner may be required to make a binary choice between z = 0 and

z = 1, Analogously, the planner chooses between treatment actions c = a and c = b. The new analysis

performed here studies this setting.

       Welfare in state s in this binary choice problem equals max{Es[y(b)], Es[y(a)]} or min {Es[y(b)],

Es[y(a)]}. Section 2.3 showed that, in states where treatment a is better, the regret of an SDF is the product

of the sampling probability that the rule commits a Type I error and the loss in welfare when choosing b.

Similarly, in states where b is better, regret is the probability of a Type II error times the loss in welfare

when choosing a. Thus, regret in state s is Rcs⋅|Es[y(b)] − Es[y(a)]|. The treatment rule being singleton and

deterministic, the error probability can only equal 0 or 1. Thus, regret is either 0 or |Es[y(b)] − Es[y(a)]|.

       With outcomes having range [0, 1], E[y(a)|δ(a) = 0] and E[y(b)|δ(b) = 0] can take any values in this

interval. Hence, by the Law of Iterated Expectations, the feasible values of E[y(a)] and E[y(b)] are



(11a)    E[y(a)] ∈ [E[y(a)|δ(a) = 1]⋅(1 – p), E[y(a)|δ(a) = 1]⋅(1 – p) + p],
                                                     30


(11b) E[y(b)] ∈ [E[y(b)|δ(b) = 1]⋅p, E[y(b)|δ(b) = 1]⋅p + (1 – p)].



With choice of treatment a, regret is zero when Es[y(b)] < Es[y(a)] and positive when Es[y(b)] > Es[y(a)].

Maximum regret occurs when Es[y(a)|δ(a) = 0] = 0 and Es[y(b)|δ(b) = 0] = 1. Then regret is



(12a)   Ras⋅|Es[y(b)] − Es[y(a)]| = E[y(b)|δ(b) = 1]⋅p + {(1 – E[y(a)|δ(a) = 1]}⋅(1 – p) = zMMR.



With choice of b, maximum regret is



(12b) Rbs⋅|Es[y(b)] − Es[y(a)]| = E[y(a)|δ(a) = 1]⋅(1 – p) + {1 − E[y(b)|δ(b) = 1]}⋅p = 1 − zMMR.



Thus, treatment b minimizes maximum regret if zMMR ≥ ½ and treatment a if zMMR ≤ ½.

     This finding quantifies how constraining the planner to make a deterministic singleton treatment

choice rather than a fractional allocation reduces welfare. The MMR value subject to the constraint is

min(zMMR, 1 − zMMR). When fractional allocations are permitted, it is zMMR(1 − zMMR).



5.2.2. Maximum Regret of the ES Rule

     A common assumption made when interpreting observational data posits that counterfactual and

realized outcome distributions coincide, as in an ideal trial. Then treatment choice with the ES rule is

optimal when the distribution of realized outcomes is known. However, the ES rule need not perform as

well with larger state spaces. I examine the setting in which all outcome distributions are feasible.

     Given knowledge of the distribution of realized outcomes, the ES rule chooses treatment b if

E[y(b)|δ(b) = 1] > E[y(a)|δ(a) = 1] and a if E[y(b)|δ(b) = 1] < E[y(a)|δ(a) = 1]. Either choice is consistent
                                                          31


with the rule if E[y(b)|δ(b) = 1] = E[y(a)|δ(a) = 1]. 6

     When p = ½, the ES rule coincides with the deterministic singleton rule that minimizes maximum

regret. We found above that treatment b minimizes maximum regret if zMMR ≥ ½ and treatment a if zMMR ≤

½. When p = ½, expression (10) reduces to zMMR = ½{E[y(b)|δ(b) = 1] − E[y(a)|δ(a) = 1]} + ½.

     When p ≠ ½, the ES and MMR rules yield the same treatment choice in some cases but different

choices in others. Both treatments are consistent with the ES rule if E[y(b)|δ(b) = 1] = E[y(a)|δ(a) = 1]. Both

are consistent with the MMR rule when zMMR = ½. I focus on cases where neither equality holds.

     When E[y(a)|δ(a) = 1] > E[y(b)|δ(b) = 1], the ES rule chooses treatment a. By (12a), maximum regret

is zMMR. When E[y(b)|δ(b) = 1] > E[y(a)|δ(a) = 1], the rule chooses b. By (12b), maximum regret is 1−zMMR.



5.2.3. Illustration: Sentencing and Recidivism

     To illustrate, I use the Manski and Nagin (1998) analysis of sentencing and recidivism of juvenile

offenders in the state of Utah. The feasible treatments are sentencing options. Judges in Utah have had the

discretion to order varying sentences for juvenile offenders. Some offenders have been sentenced to

residential confinement (treatment a) and others have been given sentences with no confinement (treatment

b). A possible policy would be to replace judicial discretion with a mandate that all offenders be confined.

Another would be to mandate that no offenders be confined.

     To compare these mandates, we took the outcome of interest to be recidivism in the two-year period

following sentencing. Let y = 1 if an offender commits no new offense and y = 0 otherwise. No new offense

was interpreted as treatment success, and commission of a new offense was interpreted as failure.

     We obtained data on the sentences received and the recidivism outcomes realized by all male offenders

in Utah born from 1970 through 1974 and convicted of offenses before they reached age 16. The data reveal

that 11 percent of the offenders were sentenced to confinement and that 23 percent of these persons did not



6
  Maximum regret of the ES rule when E[y(b)|δ(b) = 1] = E[y(a)|δ(a) = 1] differs depending on whether a planner in
this setting chooses a specified treatment or randomizes. Randomizing yields smaller maximum regret than choosing
a specified treatment.
                                                      32


offend again in the two years following sentencing. The remaining 89 percent were sentenced to non-

confinement and 41 percent of these persons did not offend again. Thus, P[y(a)|δ(a) = 1] = 0.23, P[y(b)|δ(b)

= 1] = 0.41, and p = 0.89.

       Reviewing the criminology literature on sentencing and recidivism, we found little research on

sentencing practices and disparate predictions of treatment response. Hence, we performed partial

identification analysis of treatment response, assuming no knowledge of counterfactual outcomes. This

makes the present analysis applicable.

       Equation (12a) shows that the maximum regret of treatment a is (0.41)(0.89) + 0.11 – (0.23)(0.11) =

0.45. Equation (12b) shows that the maximum regret of b is (0.23)(0.11) + 0.89 − (0.41)(0.89) = 0.55.

Hence, treatment a minimizes maximum regret.

       Suppose one assumes that Utah judges have sentenced offenders randomly to treatments and b. One

then might use the ES rule to choose between the two. Given that 0.41 > 0.23, the result is choice of

treatment b. Thus, the ES rule selects the treatment that is inferior from the minimax-regret perspective.



5.3. Treatment Choice with Observational Sample Data



       The above analysis assumes knowledge of p, E[y(a)|δ(a) = 1], and E[y(b)|δ(b) = 1]. Suppose that one

only observes realized treatments and outcomes in a random sample of the population. Sample data are

informative, but they do not reveal population distributions. Hence, the state space has the higher-

dimensional form {Ps[y(a)|δ(a) = 1], Ps[y(a)|δ(a) = 0], Ps[y(b)|δ(b) = 1], Ps[y(b)|δ(b) = 0], ps, s  S}.

       Considering a planner who can make a fractional treatment allocation, Manski (2007), Proposition 2

proved that choosing the sample analog of zMMR as the treatment allocation yields the same maximum regret

as does zMMR. Here is the reasoning. The sample analog of zMMR is



(13)       zN = EN[y(b)|δ(b) = 1]∙pN + {1 − EN[y(a)|δ(a) = 1]}(1 – pN)

               = EN[y(b)∙δ(b)] − EN[y(a)∙δ(a)] + (1 – pN).
                                                       33




The second equality shows that E(zN) = zMMR. This and the fact that welfare is linear in zMMR imply that the

finite-sample maximum regret achieved by zN equals the maximum regret achieved by zMMR.

     This finding extends to settings where a planner is not permitted to make a fractional allocation but

can make a randomized singleton treatment choice. Consideration of randomized rules is inherently

necessary when contemplating treatment choice with sample data because the data are themselves randomly

drawn. It is easy to modify zN to obtain an MMR randomized singleton rule. Let u be a uniform random

variable drawn independently of the sample data. Consider the rule zNu ≡ 1[u ≤ zN]. Then E(zNu|zN) = zN and

E(zNu) = E[E(zNu|zN)] = E(zN) = zMMR.

     Now suppose that a planner is constrained to make treatment choice a deterministic singleton function

of the empirical distribution of realized outcomes and treatments. Thus, randomization with an independent

uniform random variable is not permitted. The ES rule remains feasible. Another possibility, which I call

the asymptotic minimax-regret (AMMR) rule, chooses treatment b if zN > ½ and a if zN < ½, with a specified

default choice made if zN = ½.

     Algebraic computation of the maximum regret of the AMMR and ES rules appears intractable, a

difficulty being that state-dependent error probabilities generally do not have explicit forms. Litvin and

Manski (2021) documents an algorithm coded in STATA for numerical computation of the maximum regret

of these and other user-specified treatment rules in settings with binary outcomes. Coding for the AMMR,

ES, and some decision rules using instrumental variables is built in, including default treatment choices

when a rule does not yield a unique choice.

     The program uses Monte Carlo integration to approximate state-dependent error probabilities for a

specified rule. Maximum regret is approximated by computing regret on a grid that discretizes the state

space. The state space specifies feasible values for the five Bernoulli distributions {Ps[y(a)|δ(a) = 1],

Ps[y(a)|δ(a) = 0], Ps[y(b)|δ(b) = 1], Ps[y(b)|δ(b) = 0], Ps[δ(b) = 1)], s  S}. A user can place a flexible set of

constraints on the feasible distributions. One may place lower and/or upper bounds on the values of the
                                                            34


Bernoulli probabilities. One may impose no restrictions connecting distributions of realized and

counterfactual outcome, or one may bound the difference between these distributions.

     Tables 3 and 4 use the program to compute the maximum regret of the AMMR and ES rules. Panels

A and B of each table differ in the feasible outcome distributions. All distributions are feasible in Panel A.

Panel B bounds the difference between distributions of realized and counterfactual outcomes, assuming that

−½ ≤ P[y(t) = 1|δ(t) = 1] – P[y(t) = 1|δ(t) = 0] ≤ ½, t ∊ {a, b}.

     Each row of a table specifies a sample size N, in increments of 25 from 25 to 100. Each column is a

value of p, in increments of 0.1 from 0.5 to 9. It is unnecessary to consider values of p below 0.5 because

the state space in each panel views the two treatments symmetrically; hence, maximum regret is the same

for p and 1 – p.

     Given values for N and p, a cell entry presents the approximate value of maximum regret across

feasible values of {P[y(t)|δ(t) = 1], P[y(t)|δ(t) = 0]}, t ∊ {a, b}. In each state of nature, regret is approximated

by Monte Carlo integration across 5000 simulated samples. 7 Maximum regret across feasible Bernoulli

distributions is approximated by maximizing over a grid of 25 values for each Bernoulli parameter.

Someone who does not know p but who finds it credible to bound it can approximate maximum regret at a

specified sample size by the maximum entry across the relevant column cells of the table.

     Table 3A has many interesting features. Observe that the maximum regret of the AMMR rule does not

vary with p. Moreover, for each value of p, maximum regret rises rather than falls with sample size N,

increasing from about 0.34 at N = 25 to 0.40 at N = 100. Part of the explanation for both features is that

sampling variation makes the rule more randomized for small N and less so for large N. In the polar case

N = 1, the AMMR rule coincides with the randomized singleton rule zN, which has maximum regret ¼ for




7
  To create a simulated sample, the program draws N observations {δi, i = 1, . . . , N} from distribution Ps[δ(b) = 1].
Let K = ∑ i δi. It draws K observations {yi, i = 1, . . , K} from Ps[y(b)|δ(b) = 1] and N – K from Ps[y(a)|δ(a) = 1]. It is
possible that K = 0 or N, so the specified treatment rules must be defined for these cases. The program uses the
simulated realizations of (δ, y) to compute a simulated treatment choice. For a specified positive integer T, the program
repeats the above T times and uses the T simulated treatment choices to approximate regret in state s.
                                                          35


all values of p. 8 As N → ∞, the AMMR rule approaches the MMR deterministic singleton rule, which has

maximum regret ½ for all values of p. 9

     Table 3B constrains the state space to bound the difference between realized and counterfactual

outcomes distributions. This mitigates the identification problem. The restriction reduces maximum regret

moderately when p = 0.5, but only negligibly when p = 0.9.

     Tables 4A and 4B consider the ES rule. Section 5.2.2 considered this rule when the distribution of

realized outcomes is known. It was shown that, depending on this distribution, maximum regret equals zMMR

or 1 − zMMR. Holding p fixed, maximum regret across all values of E[y(a)|δ(a) = 1] and E[y(b)|δ(b) = 1] is

max (p, 1 – p). Table 4A shows that this is also maximum regret for the finite-sample version of the ES

rule. 10 Table 4B shows that restricting the state space to bound the difference between realized and

counterfactual distributions reduces maximum regret. The findings are somewhat subtle due to the small-

sample effect of constraining the state space, with different behavior for p = 0.5 and 0.6 than for p ≥ 0.7.6.



6. Conclusion



     To reiterate the central theme of this paper, use of statistical decision theory to evaluate econometric

models is conceptually coherent and simple. A planner specifies a state space listing all the states of nature



8
  When N = 1, zN can only take the value 0 or 1. Hence, zN = 1[zN > ½]. It was found above that, for any value of N,
the maximum regret of zN given knowledge of the distribution of realized outcomes is zMMR(1 − zMMR). Maximum
regret across all {p, E[y(a)|δ(a) = 1], E[y(b)|δ(b) = 1]} is ¼, which occurs when zMMR = ½. This occurs for every p
when E[y(a)|δ(a) = 1] = E[y(b)|δ(b) = 1] = ½.

9
  It was found above that, given knowledge of the distribution of realized outcomes, the maximum regret of the MMR
deterministic singleton rule is min (zMMR, 1 − zMMR). Maximum regret across all {p, E[y(a)|δ(a) = 1], E[y(b)|δ(b) = 1]}
is ½, which occurs when zMMR = ½. This occurs for every p when E[y(a)|δ(a) = 1] = E[y(b)|δ(b) = 1] = ½.
10
  The ES rule does not benefit in small samples from the randomizing effect of random sampling because the states
yielding maximum regret are polar ones where E[y(a)|δ(a) = 1] and E[y(b)|δ(b) = 1] equal 0 or 1. Holding p fixed, the
supremum of regret across {E[y(a)|δ(a) = 1], E[y(b)|δ(b) = 1]} such that E[y(a)|δ(a) = 1] > E[y(b)|δ(b) = 1] is p when
p > ½ and 1 – p when p < ½. The former occurs when E[y(a)|δ(a) = 1] = 1 and E[y(b)|δ(b) = 1] → 1 and the latter
when E[y(b)|δ(b) = 1] = 0 and E[y(a)|δ(a) = 1] → 0. The supremum of regret across {E[y(a)|δ(a) = 1], E[y(b)|δ(b) =
1]} such that E[y(b)|δ(b) = 1] > E[y(a)|δ(a) = 1] is again p when p > ½ and 1 – p when p < ½. The former occurs when
E[y(a)|δ(a) = 1] = 0 and E[y(b)|δ(b) = 1] → 0 and the latter when E[y(b)|δ(b) = 1] = 1 and E[y(a)|δ(a) = 1] → 1.
                                                    36


deemed feasible. One evaluates the performance of an SDF by the state-dependent vector of expected

welfare that it yields. Decisions using models are evaluated in this manner. One evaluates model-based

SDFs by their performance across the state space, not across the model space.

     The primary challenge to use of statistical decision theory is computational. Recall that, in his

discussion sketching application of statistical decision theory to prediction, Haavelmo (1944) remarked that

such application (p. 111): “although simple in principle, will in general involve considerable mathematical

problems and heavy algebra.” Many mathematical operations that were infeasible in 1944 are tractable now,

as a result of advances in analytical and numerical methods. The advances include important theorems

yielding useful large deviations bounds and local-asymptotic approximations, as well as revolutionary

developments in computer capabilities that enable approximate numerical solution of decision problems.

Hence, it has increasingly become possible to use statistical decision theory when performing econometric

research that aims to inform decision making. Future advances should continue to expand the scope of

applications.
                                                   37


References

Angrist, J., K. Graddy, and G. Imbens (2000), “The Interpretation of Instrumental Variables Estimators in
Simultaneous Equations Models with an Application to the Demand for Fish,” Review of Economic Studies,
67, 499-527.

Athey, S. and S. Wager (2019), “Efficient Policy Learning,” https://arxiv.org/pdf/1702.02896.pdf.

Bell, D., H. Raiffa, and A. Tversky (1988), Decision Making: Descriptive, Normative, and Prescriptive
Interactions, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Berger, J. (1985), Statistical Decision Theory and Bayesian Analysis, New York: Springer-Verlag.

Berger, J. (2006), “The Case for Objective Bayesian Analysis,” Bayesian Analysis, 1, 385-402.

Binmore, K. (2009), Rational Decisions, Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Bjerkholt, O. (2007), “Writing ‘The Probability Approach’ With Nowhere to Go: Haavelmo in The United
States, 1939-1944,” Econometric Theory, 23, 775-837.

Bjerkholt, O. (2010), “The 'meteorological' and the 'engineering' type of econometric inference: A 1943
exchange between Trygve Haavelmo and Jakob Marschak,” Memorandum, No. 2010,07, University of
Oslo, Department of Economics, Oslo.

Bjerkholt, O. (2015), “Trygve Haavelmo at the Cowles Commission,” Econometric Theory, 31, 1-84.

Blyth, C. (1970), “On the Inference and Decision Models of Statistics,” The Annals of Mathematical
Statistics, 41, 1034-1058.

Box, G. (1979), “Robustness in the Strategy of Scientific Model Building,” in R. Launer and G. Wilkinson
(eds.), Robustness in Statistics, New York: Academic Press, 201-236.

Chamberlain G. (2000a), “Econometric Applications of Maxmin Expected Utility,” Journal of Applied
Econometrics, 15, 625-644.

Chamberlain, G. (2000b), “Econometrics and Decision Theory,” Journal of Econometrics, 95, 255-283.

Chamberlain, G. (2007), “Decision Theory Applied to an Instrumental Variables Model,” Econometrica,
75, 605-692.

Chamberlain, G. and A. Moreira (2009), “Decision Theory Applied to a Linear Panel Data Model,”
Econometrica, 77, 107-133.

Cheng, Y., F. Su, and D. Berry (2003), “Choosing Sample Size for a Clinical Trial Using Decision
Analysis,” Biometrika, 90, 923-936.

Chernoff, H. (1954), “Rational Selection of Decision Functions,” Econometrica, 22, 422-443.

DeGroot, M. (1970), Optimal Statistical Decisions, New York: McGraw-Hill.
                                                   38


Dempster, A. (1968), “A Generalization of Bayesian Inference,” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society,
Series B, 30, 205-247.

Diebold, F. (2015), “Comparing Predictive Accuracy, Twenty Years Later: A Personal Perspective on the
Use and Abuse of Diebold–Mariano Tests,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 33, 1-9.

Dominitz, J. and C. Manski (2017), “More Data or Better Data? A Statistical Decision Problem,” Review
of Economic Studies, 84, 1583-1605.

Dominitz, J. and C. Manski (2021), “Minimax-Regret Sample Design in Anticipation of Missing Data,
With Application to Panel Data,” Journal of Econometrics, forthcoming.

Friedman, M. and L. Savage (1948), “The Utility Analysis of Choices Involving Risk,” Journal of Political
Economy, 56, 279-304.

Gilboa, I. and D. Schmeidler (1989), “Maxmin Expected Utility with Non-Unique Prior,” Journal of
Mathematical Economics, 18, 141-153.

Goldberger, A. (1968), Topics in Regression Analysis, New York: McMillan.

Haavelmo, T. (1943), “The Statistical Implications of a System of Simultaneous Equations,” Econometrica,
11, 1-12.

Haavelmo, T. (1944), “The Probability Approach in Econometrics,” Econometrica, 12, Supplement, iii-vi
and 1-115.

Hansen, L. and T. Sargent (2001), “Robust Control and Model Uncertainty,” American Economic Review,
91, 60-66.

Hansen, L. and T. Sargent (2008), Robustness, Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Hampel, F., E, Ronchetti, P. Rousseeuw, and A. Werner (1986), Robust statistics, New York: Wiley.

Hausman, J. (1978), “Specification Tests in Econometrics,” Econometrica, 46, 1251-1272.

Hirano, K. and J. Porter (2009), “Asymptotics for Statistical Treatment Rules,” Econometrica, 77,1683-
1701.

Hirano, K. and J. Porter (2019), “Statistical Decision Rules in Econometrics,” in Handbook of
Econometrics, Vol. 7, edited by S. Durlauf, L. Hansen, J. Heckman, and R. Matzkin, Amsterdam: North
Holland, forthcoming.

Hodges, E. and E. Lehmann (1950), “Some Problems in Minimax Point Estimation,” Annals of
Mathematical Statistics, 21, 182-197.

Hood, W. and T. Koopmans (editors) (1953), Studies in Econometric Method, Cowles Commission
Monograph No. 14. New York: Wiley.

Huber, P. (1964), “Robust Estimation of a Location Parameter,” Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 35, 73-
101.
                                                  39


Huber, P. (1981), Robust Statistics, New York: Wiley.

Imbens, G. and J. Angrist (1994), “Identification and Estimation of Local Average Treatment Effects,”
Econometrica, 62, 467-476.

Kitagawa, T. and A. Tetenov (2018), “Who Should be Treated? Empirical Welfare Maximization Methods
for Treatment Choice,” Econometrica, 86, 591-616.

Koopmans, T. (1949), “Identification Problems in Economic Model Construction.” Econometrica, 17: 125–
144.

Koopmans, T. (editor) (1950), Statistical Inference in Dynamic Economic Models, Cowles Commission
Monograph No. 10. New York: Wiley.

Koopmans, T. and W. Hood (1953), “The Estimation of Simultaneous Linear Economic Relationships,”
Chapter 6 in Hood, W. and T. Koopmans (editors) Studies in Econometric Method, Cowles Commission
Monograph No. 14. New York: Wiley, 112-199.

Litvin, V. and C. Manski (2021), “Evaluating the Maximum Regret of Statistical Treatment Rules with
Sample Data on Treatment Response,” STATA Journal, 21, forthcoming.

Manski, C. (1989), AAnatomy of the Selection Problem,@ Journal of Human Resources, 24, 343-360.

Manski, C. (1990), “Nonparametric Bounds on Treatment Effects,” American Economic Review Papers
and Proceedings, 80, 319-323.

Manski, C. (1995), Identification Problems in the Social Sciences, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.

Manski, C. (2000), “Identification Problems and Decisions Under Ambiguity: Empirical Analysis of
Treatment Response and Normative Analysis of Treatment Choice,” Journal of Econometrics, 95, 415-442.

Manski, C. (2004), “Statistical Treatment Rules for Heterogeneous Populations,” Econometrica, 72, 221-
246.

Manski, C. (2005), Social Choice with Partial Knowledge of Treatment Response, Princeton: Princeton
University Press.

Manski, C. (2007), “Minimax-Regret Treatment Choice with Missing Outcome Data,” Journal of
Econometrics, 139, 105-115.

Manski, C. (2009), “Diversified Treatment under Ambiguity,” International Economic Review, 50, 1013-
1041.

Manski, C. (2011), “Actualist Rationality,” Theory and Decision, 71, 195-210.

Manski, C. (2019), ATreatment Choice with Trial Data: Statistical Decision Theory Should Supplant
Hypothesis Testing,@ The American Statistician, 73, 296-304.

Manski, C. and D. Nagin (1998), “Bounding Disagreements about Treatment Effects: a Case Study of
Sentencing and Recidivism,” Sociological Methodology, 28, 99-137.
                                                   40



Manski, C. and M. Tabord-Meehan (2017), “Wald MSE: Evaluating the Maximum MSE of Mean Estimates
with Missing Data,” STATA Journal, 17, 723-735.

Manski, C. and A. Tetenov (2014), “The Quantile Performance of Statistical Treatment Rules Using
Hypothesis Tests to Allocate a Population to Two Treatments,” Cemmap working paper CWP44/14.

Manski, C. and A. Tetenov (2016), “Sufficient Trial Size to Inform Clinical Practice,” Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 113, 10518-10523.

Manski, C. and A. Tetenov (2019), “Trial Size for Near-Optimal Choice Between Surveillance and
Aggressive Treatment: Reconsidering MSLT-II,” The American Statistician, 73, S1, 305-311.

Manski, C. and A. Tetenov (2021), “Statistical Decision Properties of Imprecise Trials Assessing COVID-
19 Drugs,” Value in Health, forthcoming.

Marschak, J. and W. Andrews (1944), “Random Simultaneous Equations and the Theory of Production,”
Econometrica, 12, 143-205.

Masten, M. and A. Poirier (2021), “Salvaging Falsified Instrumental Variables Models,” Econometrica,
forthcoming.

Neyman, J. (1962), “Two Breakthroughs in the Theory of Statistical Decision Making,” Review of the
International Statistical Institute, 30, 11-27.

Neyman, J., and E. Pearson (1928), “On the Use and Interpretation of Certain Test Criteria for Purposes of
Statistical Inference,” Biometrika, 20A, 175-240, 263-294.

Neyman, J., and E. Pearson (1933), “On the Problem of the Most Efficient Tests of Statistical Hypotheses,”
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London, Ser. A, 231, 289-337.

Patton, A. (2019), “Comparing Possibly Misspecified Forecasts,” Journal of Business and Economic
Statistics, https://doi.org/10.1080/07350015.2019.1585256.

Savage, L. (1951), “The Theory of Statistical Decision,” Journal of the American Statistical Association,
46, 55-67.

Scott, S. (2010), “A Modern Bayesian Look at the Multi-Armed Bandit,” Applied Stochastic Models in
Business and Industry, 26, 639-658.

Sen, A. (1993), “Internal Consistency of Choice,” Econometrica, 61, 495-521.

Spiegelhalter D., L. Freedman, and M. Parmar (1994), “Bayesian Approaches to Randomized Trials” (with
discussion), Journal of the Royal Statistics Society Series A, 157, 357-416.

Stoye, J. (2009), “Minimax Regret Treatment Choice with Finite Samples,” Journal of Econometrics, 151,
70-81.

Stoye, J. (2012), “Minimax Regret Treatment Choice with Covariates or with Limited Validity of
Experiments,” Journal of Econometrics, 166, 138-156.
                                                   41


Vapnik, V. (1999) “An Overview of Statistical Learning Theory,” IEEE Transactions on Neural
Networks,” 10, 988-999.

Wald, A. (1939), “Contribution to the Theory of Statistical Estimation and Testing Hypotheses,” Annals of
Mathematical Statistics, 10, 299-326.

Wald, A. (1945), “Statistical Decision Functions Which Minimize the Maximum Risk,” Annals of
Mathematics, 46, 265-280.

Wald A. (1950), Statistical Decision Functions, New York: Wiley.

Walley, P. (1991), Statistical Reasoning with Imprecise Probabilities, New York: Chapman and Hall.

Watson, J. and C. Holmes (2016), “Approximate Models and Robust Decisions,” Statistical Science, 31,
465-489.

White, H. (1982), “Maximum Likelihood Estimation of Misspecified Models,” Econometrica, 50, 1-25.

Zhou, K., J. Doyle, and K. Glover (1996), Robust and Optimal Control, New Jersey: Prentice Hall.
                                                     42


Appendix: Further Discussion of Statistical Decision Theory



A.1. Bayes Decisions



     Considering contexts where one wants to minimize loss rather than maximize welfare, research in

statistical decision theory often refers to criterion (4) as minimization of Bayes risk. This term may seem

odd given the absence of any reference in (4) to Bayesian inference. Criterion (4) simply places a subjective

distribution π on the state space ex ante and optimizes the resulting subjective average welfare. No posterior

distribution computed after observation of data appears in the criterion.

     Justification for use of the word Bayes when considering (4) rests on a mathematical result relating

this criterion to conditional Bayes decision making. The conditional Bayes approach calls on one to first

perform Bayesian inference, which uses the likelihood function for the observed data to transform the prior

distribution on the state space into a posterior distribution, without reference to a decision problem. One

then chooses an action that maximizes posterior subjective average welfare.

     See, for example, the seminal text of DeGroot (1970) on Optimal Statistical Decisions or discussions

of applications to randomized trials in articles such as Spiegelhalter, Freedman, and Parmar (1994), Cheng,

Su, and Berry (2003), and Scott (2010). The conditional Bayes perspective has long been used to study not

only static decisions but also sequential decisions, which are formalized as dynamic programming

problems. These include problems of sequential experimentation, sometimes called bandit problems.

     As described above, conditional Bayes decision making is unconnected to Wald’s frequentist statistical

decision theory. However, suppose that the set of feasible statistical decision functions is unconstrained and

that certain regularity conditions hold. Then it follows from Fubini’s Theorem that the conditional Bayes

decision for each possible data realization solves Wald’s problem of maximization of subjective average

welfare. See Berger (1985, Section 4.4.1) for general analysis and Chamberlain (2007) for application to a

linear econometric model with instrumental variables. On the other hand, Kitagawa and Tetenov (2018)

and Athey and Wager (2019) study treatment-choice problems in which the set of feasible decision
                                                          43


functions is constrained. Wald’s criterion (4) need not yield the same actions as conditional Bayes decision

making in these constrained settings.

     The equivalence of Wald’s criterion (4) and conditional Bayes decisions is a mathematical result that

holds under specified conditions. Philosophical advocates of the conditional Bayes paradigm go beyond the

mathematics. They assert as a self-evident axiom that decision making should condition on observed data

and should not perform frequentist thought experiments that contemplate how statistical decision functions

perform in repeated sampling; see, for example, Berger (1985, Chapter 1).

     Considering the mathematical equivalence of minimization of Bayes risk and conditional Bayes

decisions, Berger asserted that that the conditional Bayes perspective is normatively “correct” and that the

Wald frequentist perspective is “bizarre.” He stated (p. 160):

        “Note that, from the conditional perspective together with the utility development of loss, the
        correct way to view the situation is that of minimizing ρ(π(θ|x), a). One should condition on what
        is known, namely x . . . . and average the utility over what is unknown, namely θ. The desire to
        minimize r(π, δ) would be deemed rather bizarre from this perspective.”
In this passage, a is an action, x is data, θ is a state of nature, π(θ|x) is the posterior distribution on the state

space, ρ is posterior loss with choice of action a, δ is a statistical decision function, π is the prior distribution

on the state space, and r(π, δ) is the Bayes risk of δ.

     I view Berger’s normative statement to be overly enthusiastic for two reasons. First, the statement does

not address how decisions should be made when part of the decision is choice of a procedure for collection

of data, as in experimental or sample design. Such decisions must be made ex ante, before collecting the

data. Hence, frequentist consideration of the performance of decision functions across possible realizations

of the data is inevitable. Berger recognized this in his chapter on “Preposterior and Sequential Analysis.”

     Second, the Bayesian prescription for conditioning decision making on sample data presumes that the

planner feels able to place a credible subjective prior distribution on the state space. However, Bayesians

have long struggled to provide guidance on specification of priors and the matter continues to be

controversial. See, for example, the spectrum of views regarding Bayesian analysis of randomized trials
                                                      44


expressed by the authors and discussants of Spiegelhalter, Freedman, and Parmar (1994). The controversy

suggests that inability to express a credible prior is common in actual decision settings.

     When one finds it difficult to assert a credible subjective distribution, Bayesians may suggest use of

some default distribution, called a “reference” or “conventional” or “objective” prior; see Berger (2006).

However, there is no consensus on the prior that should play this role. The chosen prior affects decisions.



A.2. Maximin and Minimax Regret



     Concern with specification of priors motivated Wald (1950) to study the minimax criterion. He wrote

(p. 18): “a minimax solution seems, in general, to be a reasonable solution of the decision problem when

an a priori distribution . . . . does not exist or is unknown to the experimenter.”

     I similarly am concerned with decision making in the absence of a subjective distribution on the state

space. However, I have mainly measured the performance of SDFs by maximum regret rather than by

minimum expected welfare. The maximin and MMR criteria are sometimes confused with one another, but

they are equivalent only in special cases, particularly when the value of optimal welfare is invariant across

states of nature. The criteria obviously differ more generally. Whereas maximin considers only the worst

outcome that an action may yield across states, MMR considers the worst outcome relative to what is

achievable in a given state.

     Practical and conceptual reasons motivate focus on maximum regret. From a practical perspective,

MMR decisions behave more reasonably than do maximin ones in the important context of treatment choice

with data from randomized trials. In common settings with balanced designs, the MMR rule is well

approximated by the empirical success rule, which chooses the treatment with the highest observed average

outcome in the trial; see Section 5. In contrast, the maximin criterion ignores the trial data, whatever they

may be. This was recognized verbally by Savage (1951), who stated that the criterion is “ultrapessimistic”

and wrote (p. 63): “it can lead to the absurd conclusion in some cases that no amount of relevant
                                                      45


experimentation should deter the actor from behaving as though he were in complete ignorance.” Savage

did not flesh out this statement, but it is easy to show that this occurs with trial data; see Manski (2004).

     The conceptual appeal of using maximum regret to measure performance is that maximum regret

quantifies how lack of knowledge of the true state of nature diminishes the quality of decisions. While the

term “maximum regret” has been standard in the literature, this term is a shorthand for the maximum sub-

optimality of a decision criterion across the feasible states of nature. An SDF with small maximum regret

is uniformly near-optimal across all states. This is a desirable property.

     Minimax regret has drawn diverse reactions from decision theorists. In a famous early critique,

Chernoff (1954) observed that MMR decisions are not always consistent with the choice axiom known as

independence of irrelevant alternatives (IIA). He considered this a serious deficiency, writing (p. 426):

        “A third objection which the author considers very serious is the following. In some examples, the
        min max regret criterion may select a strategy d3 among the available strategies d1, d2, d3, and d4.
        On the other hand, if for some reason d4 is made unavailable, the min max regret criterion will
        select d2 among d1, d2, and d3. The author feels that for a reasonable criterion the presence of an
        undesirable strategy d4 should not have an influence on the choice among the remaining strategies.”
This passage is the totality of Chernoff’s argument. He introspected and concluded that reasonable decision

criteria should always adhere to the IIA axiom, but he did not explain why he felt this way. Chernoff’s view

has been endorsed by some modern decision theorists, such as Binmore (2009). However, Sen (1993)

argued that adherence to axioms such as IIA does not per se provide a sound basis for evaluation of decision

criteria. He asserted that consideration of the context of decision making is essential.

     Manski (2011) argued that adherence to the IIA axiom is not a virtue per se. What matters is how

violation of the axiom affects welfare. I observed that the MMR violation of the IIA axiom does not yield

choice of a dominated SDF. The MMR decision is always undominated when it is unique. There generically

exists an undominated MMR decision when the criterion has multiple solutions. Hence, I concluded that

violation of the IIA axiom is not a sound rationale to dismiss minimax regret.



A.3. Choosing the Welfare Function, State Space, and Decision Criterion
                                                      46




     In principle, statistical decision theory views the welfare function, state space, and decision criterion

as separate meta-choices made the planner. The welfare function expresses what the planner wants to

achieve. The state space lists all states that he believes might occur. The decision criterion expresses how

he wants to cope with uncertainty. Statistical decision theory views these meta-choices as predetermined

rather than as matters to be studied within the theory.

     Arguably, planners might choose welfare functions, state spaces, and decision criteria jointly rather

separately. A practical reason is that some joint choices yield decision problems that are easier to solve than

others. Hence, planner might find it desirable to make a joint choice that yields tractable solutions.

     A fundamental issue for meta-choice is that some choices may not be implementable. Consider, for

example, maximization of subjective expected welfare when the state space is nonparametric. It is

mathematically delicate to specify subjective distributions on nonparametric spaces. For example, the

familiar notion of a flat prior may not be well-defined.

     Another issue is that implementable choices which initially seem appealing may yield solutions that

seem “unattractive” in some sense. An example is Savage’s conclusion, discussed above, that maximin

treatment choice with data from a randomized trial is unattractive because it ignores the data entirely.

     Stoye (2009) studies a more subtle case of decisions that ignore trial data entirely. This occurs when

members of the population have an observable covariate that is continuously distributed across persons and

when the state space does not constrain how treatment response varies with the covariate. His analysis

focuses on MMR, but his method of proof uses the equivalence of MMR to maximization of subjective

expected welfare with a certain worst-case prior. Hence, his result also holds for this case of maximization

of subjective expected welfare.
                                                47


                           Table 1A: Maximum MSE of Midpoint Predictor
                                 Unrestricted Outcome Distributions

N                                                 P(δ = 1)
        0.1        0.2       0.3      0.4      0.5       0.6     0.7        0.8      0.9       1
 25   0.1963     0.1567    0.1219   0.0917   0.0658 0.0451     0.0292     0.0184   0.0120   0.0105
 50   0.1956     0.1554    0.1200   0.0891   0.0632 0.0422     0.0258     0.0140   0.0072   0.0052
 75   0.1953     0.1552    0.1196   0.0887   0.0624 0.0409     0.0243     0.0125   0.0055   0.0034
100   0.1952     0.1548    0.1191   0.0881   0.0620 0.0404     0.0237     0.0119   0.0048   0.0025


                           Table 1B: Maximum MSE of Midpoint Predictor
                               −½ ≤ P(y = 1|δ = 1) − P(y = 1|δ = 0) ≤ ½

N                                                 P(δ = 1)
        0.1        0.2       0.3      0.4      0.5       0.6     0.7      0.8        0.9       1
 25   0.1962     0.1567    0.1214   0.0912   0.0658 0.0451     0.0292   0.0184     0.0120   0.0105
 50   0.1956     0.1553    0.1199   0.0890   0.0631 0.0422     0.0258   0.0140     0.0072   0.0052
 75   0.1952     0.1552    0.1192   0.0885   0.0622 0.0408     0.0242   0.0125     0.0055   0.0034
100   0.1951     0.1548    0.1189   0.0881   0.0620 0.0402     0.0237   0.0119     0.0048   0.0025


               Table 2A: Maximum MSE of Prediction with Average Observed Outcome
                               Unrestricted Outcome Distributions

 N                                               P(δ = 1)
        0.1        0.2       0.3      0.4      0.5      0.6      0.7        0.8      0.9       1
 25   0.7409     0.6150    0.4716   0.3465   0.2407 0.1543     0.0870     0.0389   0.0148   0.0105
 50   0.7782     0.6166    0.4714   0.3464   0.2408 0.1542     0.0869     0.0387   0.0102   0.0052
 75   0.7793     0.6159    0.4713   0.3463   0.2406 0.1541     0.0868     0.0387   0.0098   0.0034
100   0.7779     0.6151    0.4710   0.3462   0.2404 0.1541     0.0868     0.0387   0.0098   0.0025


               Table 2B: Maximum MSE of Prediction with Average Observed Outcomes
                              −½ ≤ P(y = 1|δ = 1) − P(y = 1|δ = 0) ≤ ½

 N                                               P(δ = 1)
        0.1         0.2      0.3      0.4      0.5      0.6      0.7        0.8      0.9       1
 25   0.3189      0.2230   0.1599   0.1172   0.0836 0.0576     0.0375     0.0231   0.0143   0.0105
 50   0.2654      0.1875   0.1411   0.1033   0.0732 0.0486     0.0298     0.0165   0.0082   0.0052
 75   0.2406      0.1773   0.1345   0.0987   0.0693 0.0457     0.0273     0.0141   0.0063   0.0034
100   0.2278      0.1719   0.1303   0.0957   0.0673 0.0442     0.0261     0.0132   0.0054   0.0025
                               48


      Table 3A: Maximum Regret of the AMMR Rule
            Unrestricted Outcome Distributions

 N                                     p
            0.5         0.6           0.7       0.8        0.9
 25       0.3416      0.3441        0.3421    0.3428     0.3469
 50       0.3747      0.3782        0.3773    0.3792     0.3777
 75       0.3903      0.3887        0.3899    0.3892     0.3899
100       0.4023      0.4021        0.4011    0.4026     0.4022


     Table 3B: Maximum Regret of the AMMR Rule
−½ ≤ P[y(t) = 1|δ(t) = 1] – P[y(t) = 1|δ(t) = 0] ≤ ½, t ∊ {a, b}

N                                     p
           0.5          0.6           0.7       0.8        0.9
25       0.2772       0.2905        0.3041    0.3178     0.3313
50       0.3126       0.3290        0.3421    0.3534     0.3646
75       0.3277       0.3397        0.3523    0.3648     0.3774
100      0.3402       0.3577        0.3713    0.3852     0.3927


        Table 4A: Maximum Regret of the ES Rule
           Unrestricted Outcome Distributions

 N                                  p
           0.5        0.6         0.7          0.8        0.9
 25      0.5000     0.6000      0.7000       0.8000     0.9000
 50      0.5000     0.6000      0.7000       0.8000     0.9000
 75      0.5000     0.6000      0.7000       0.8000     0.9000
100      0.5000     0.6000      0.7000       0.8000     0.9000


       Table 4B: Maximum Regret of the ES Rule
−½ ≤ P[y(t) = 1|δ(t) = 1] – P[y(t) = 1|δ(t) = 0] ≤ ½, t ∊ {a, b}

 N                                     p
            0.5         0.6           0.7       0.8        0.9
 25       0.2791      0.3000        0.3500    0.4000     0.4500
 50       0.3086      0.3075        0.3500    0.4000     0.4500
 75       0.3280      0.3243        0.3500    0.4000     0.4500
100       0.3381      0.3375        0.3500    0.4000     0.4500
