                                         Slicing and dicing soccer: automatic detection of
                                             complex events from spatio-temporal data

                                             Lia Morra1[0000−0003−2122−7178] , Francesco Manigrasso1 , Giuseppe Canto1 ,
                                                        Claudio Gianfrate1 , Enrico Guarino1 , and Fabrizio
                                                                  Lamberti1[0000−0001−7703−1372]
arXiv:2004.04147v2 [cs.CV] 10 Apr 2020




                                          Politecnico di Torino, Department of Control and Computer Engineering, Turin IT
                                                                 10129, Italy {lia.morra}@polito.it



                                                 Abstract. The automatic detection of events in sport videos has im-
                                                 portant applications for data analytics, as well as for broadcasting and
                                                 media companies. This paper presents a comprehensive approach for de-
                                                 tecting a wide range of complex events in soccer videos starting from
                                                 positional data. The event detector is designed as a two-tier system that
                                                 detects atomic and complex events. Atomic events are detected based
                                                 on temporal and logical combinations of the detected objects, their rel-
                                                 ative distances, as well as spatio-temporal features such as velocity and
                                                 acceleration. Complex events are defined as temporal and logical com-
                                                 binations of atomic and complex events, and are expressed by means
                                                 of a declarative Interval Temporal Logic (ITL). The effectiveness of the
                                                 proposed approach is demonstrated over 16 different events, including
                                                 complex situations such as tackles and filtering passes. By formalizing
                                                 events based on principled ITL, it is possible to easily perform reason-
                                                 ing tasks, such as understanding which passes or crosses result in a goal
                                                 being scored. To counterbalance the lack of suitable, annotated public
                                                 datasets, we built on an open source soccer simulation engine to re-
                                                 lease the synthetic SoccER (Soccer Event Recognition) dataset, which
                                                 includes complete positional data and annotations for more than 1.6 mil-
                                                 lion atomic events and 9,000 complex events. The dataset and code are
                                                 available at https://gitlab.com/grains2/slicing-and-dicing-soccer.

                                                 Keywords: Sport analysis · Event Detection · Interval Temporal Logic
                                                 · Computer graphics


                                         1     Introduction
                                         Data-driven sport video analytics attracts considerable attention from academia
                                         and industry. This interest stems from the massive commercial appeal of sports
                                         programs, along with the increasing role played by data-driven decisions in soccer
                                         and many other sports [17]. We focus here on the challenging problem of tempo-
                                         ral event recognition and localization in soccer, which requires considering the
                                         positions and actions of several players at once.
                                             Sports analytics systems relies on a variety of data sources for event detec-
                                         tion, including broadcast videos [13,7,17], multi-view camera setup [17,12] and
2       L. Morra et al.

wearable trackers and sensors [14,3]. Large outdoor soccer stadiums are usually
equipped with multiple wide-angle, fixed position, synchronized cameras. This
setup is particularly apt at event recognition as the spatio-temporal location
of all players can be inferred in an unobtrusive and accurate fashion, without
resorting to ad-hoc sensors, as will be detailed in Section 3.3.
    Previous attempts at sports event recognition fall in two main categories:
machine learning techniques applied to spatio-temporal positional data [14,15,3]
or knowledge-based systems based, e.g., on finite state machines, fuzzy logic or
first-order logic [17,7]. The latter approach has several advantages in this context:
it does not require large training set, takes full advantage of readily available
domain knowledge, and can be easily extended with reasoning engines.
    We propose here a comprehensive event detection system based on Interval
Temporal Logics (ITL). Khan et al. applied a similar approach to identify events
of interest in broadcast videos [7]: the distance-based event detection system
takes as input bounding boxes associated with a confidence score for each object
category, and applies first-order logic to identify simple and complex events.
Complex events combine two or more simple events using logical (AND, OR) or
temporal (THEN) operators.
    Our work extends previous attempts in literature [7] in several ways. First,
we work on spatio-temporal data instead of broadcast videos: we are thus able
to detect events that require the position of multiple players at once (e.g. filter-
ing pass), or their location within the field (e.g., cross). We thus cover a much
wider range of events, determining which can be accurately detected from po-
sitional data, and which would need integration with other visual inputs (e.g.,
pose estimation). Lastly, we extend existing rule-based system by using more
expressive ITLs, which associate to each event a time interval and are capable
of both qualitative and quantitative ordering.
    A severe limitation for developing sports analytics systems is the paucity of
available datasets, which are usually small and lack fine-grained event annota-
tions. This is especially true for multi-view, fixed setups comparable to those
available in modern outdoor soccer stadiums [12]. A large scale dataset was re-
cently published based on broadcast videos [6], but annotations include only a
limited set of events (Goal, Yellow/Red Card, and Substitution).
    With the aim of fostering research in this field, we have generated and released
the synthetic Soccer Event Recognition (SoccER) dataset, based on the open
source Gameplay Football engine. The Gameplay Football engine was recently
proposed as a training gym for reinforcement learning algorithms [9]. We believe
that event recognition can similarly benefit from this approach, especially to
explore aspects such as the role of reasoning and the efficient modeling of spatial
and temporal relationships. We used the dataset to demonstrate the feasibility
of our approach, achieving precision and recall higher than 80% on most events.
   The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the SoccER
dataset. In Section 3, the event detector is described. Experimental results are
presented in Section 4 and discussed in Section 5.
                                                  Slicing and dicing soccer     3




Fig. 1: Example of scene generated by the Gameplay Football engine, with su-
perimposed ground truth bounding boxes and IDs of each player and the ball.
The ground truth and detected events are also overlaid on the bottom of the
scene: in this frame, a tackle attempt is correctly detected.


2     The SoccER Dataset

2.1   Modified Gameplay Football engine

We designed a solution to generate synthetic datasets starting from the open
source Gameplay Football game [16], which simulates a complete soccer game,
including all the most common events such as goals, fouls, corners, penalty kicks,
etc. [9]. While the graphics is not as photorealistic as that of commercial prod-
ucts, the game physics is reasonably accurate and, being the engine open source,
it can be inspected, improved and modified as needed for research purposes.
The opponent team is controlled by means of a rule-based bot, provided in the
original Gameplay Football simulator [9].
    For each time frame, we extract the positions and bounding boxes of all
distinct 22 players and the ball, the ground truth event annotation and the
corresponding video screenshots. We adopt the same field coordinate system
used in the Alfheim dataset, which includes the position of players obtained from
wearable trackers [12]. All the generated videos have a resolution of 1920×1080
pixels (Full HD) and frame rate of 30 fps. An example of generated frame is
reported in Fig. 1. We envision that event detectors can be trained and tested
directly on the generated positional data, focusing on the high-level relational
reasoning aspects of the soccer game, independently of the performance of the
player detection and tracking stage [13,7].


2.2   Events and generated datasets

Events are automatically logged by the game engine in order to generate the
ground truth annotation. We define the notion of event based on previous work
by Tovinkere et al. [18] and Khan et al. [7]. Similarly to [7], we distinguish be-
tween atomic and complex events, with a slightly different approach (as discussed
4        L. Morra et al.

                                          Complex event      Train Set Test set
    Atomic event Train Set Test set       Pass                 2,670    2,389
    KickingTheBall   3,786   3,295        PassThenGoal           33       31
    BallPossession 812,086 797,224        FilteringPass          37       27
    Tackle          34,929  26,286        FilterPassThenGoal      4        4
    BallDeflection    172      78         Cross                 197      165
    BallOut           182     168         CrossThenGoal           9        9
    Goal               45      36         Tackle               1,413    1,130
    Foul                3      10         Shot                  282      224
    Penalty             3      1          ShotThenGoal           41       36
                                          SavedShot             104       64

    Table 1: Distribution of atomic and complex events (training and test set).



in the next sub-section). Atomic events are those that are spatio-temporally lo-
calized, whereas complex (compound) events are those that occur across an
extended portion of the field, involve several players or can be constructed by a
combination of other events. Stemming from this difference, an atomic event is
associated to a given time frame, whereas a complex event is associated to a time
interval, i.e., to a starting and ending frame. Atomic events include ball posses-
sion, kicking the ball, ball deflection, tackle, ball out, goal, foul and penalty.
Complex events include ball possession, tackle, pass and its special cases (filter-
ing pass, cross), shot and saved shot. A complex ball possession, or tackle, event
corresponds to a sequence of consecutive atomic events that involve the same
players. The ground truth also includes examples of chains of events, such as a
pass, filtering pass or cross that led to a goal.
    The annotations are generated leveraging information from the game engine
bot, independently from the detection system: different finite state machines
detect the occurrence of several types of events based on the decisions of the bot
or the player, their outcomes and the positions of all the players. The definition of
each event was double-checked against the official rules of the Union of European
Football Association (UEFA), and the annotations were visually verified.
    For the present work, eight matches were synthesized through various modal-
ities (player vs. player, player vs. AI, AI vs. AI), for a total of 500 minutes of
play with 1,678,304 atomic events and 9,130 complex events, divided in a train-
ing and testing set as reported in Table 1. The game engine and dataset are
available at https://gitlab.com/grains2/slicing-and-dicing-soccer.


3     Soccer event detection: a temporal logic approach

The designed event detection system comprises two modules: an atomic event
detector and a complex event detector. The first module takes as input the x
and y coordinates of the players and the ball, and recognizes atomic (low-level)
events through feature extraction and the application of predefined rules. The
                                                     Slicing and dicing soccer     5

atomic events are stored in memory, and a temporal logic is then used to model
and recognize low- and high-level complex events [2,4].
    The proposed system is capable of detecting overall five atomic events and
10 complex events, including all events defined in the ground truth except for
fouls, penalties and goals, which would require additional information (such as
the referee position and the z coordinate of the ball).
    We adopt a methodology and notation similar to that used in [7], grounded
on declarative logic, for the rule-based system. Briefly, an atomic event is defined
as follows:
                  SE = hID, seT ype, t, hrole1 , p1 i, ..., hrolei , pi ii
where ID is an event identifier, seType is the type of the event, and t is the time
at which the event occurred; the event is associated to one or more objects, each
identified as pi and associated to a specific rolei , which identifies the function
played by the player in the event and is assigned automatically when the rule is
verified. The event can be associated to conditions to be satisfied, e.g., based on
the distance between the player and the ball.
    Complex events are built by aggregating other simple or complex events
using temporal (temporal complex events) or logical operators (logical complex
events):
      LCE = hID, ceT ype, (ts , te ), L = he1 ope2 op...open ii
      T CE = hID, ceT ype, (ts , te ), L = he1 T HEN e2 T HEN...T HEN en ii
     In all cases, ID corresponds to the event identifier, ceType to the event type,
(ts , te ) is the time interval in which the event occurred, and ei is used to iden-
tify the sub-events. In the following, we do not differentiate between logical or
temporal complex events. The main difference between our approach and that
proposed in [7] is that we model time using intervals, rather than instants. Rule
parameters were optimized using a genetic algorithm (see Section4.2).

3.1   Atomic event detector
Feature extraction Starting from the player and ball x and y positions, the
following features were calculated: velocity, acceleration, direction with respect
to the field, distance from the ball, which players move, distance from the target
line of both teams, expected cross position on target line and angle covered by
the change of direction. For a more detailed definition of the individual features,
the reader is referred to the paper by Richly et al. [14].

Rules Atomic events are detected by applying a set of rules. Even if they are
associated to a single time instant ti , in order to reduce the computational time
and calculate stable values for the features, a sliding window approach was im-
plemented: given a time instant ti , the event Ei is recognized if the corresponding
rule is satisfied by the values in the interval (ti , ti+k ), where k is equal to the
window size. Feature extraction and rule checking were implemented in Python.
Specifically, atomic events are defined as follows:
6      L. Morra et al.

1. KickingTheBall consists in a simple kick aimed at executing a cross, pass or
   shot. Starting from a position close to the player, the ball should move away
   from the player over the course of the window k, with a sudden acceleration
   and a final increased speed.

      hID, KickingT heBall, t, L = hhKickingP layer, pi i, hKickedObject, biii
      player(pi ), ball(b), Distance(pi , b, t) < Tid1
      ∀k = 1 . . . n, D(pi , b, t + k) < D(pi , b, t + k + 1),
      speed(b, t + n) < Ts1 ∃k|acceleration(b, t + k) < Ta1

2. BallPossession is defined taking into account not only the player who has
   the control of the ball (i.e., the closest player), but also the player status
   (i.e., whether it is moving or not). Secondly, since the z coordinate of the
   ball is not available, we used the ball speed to avoid accidentally triggering
   ball possession during cross events.

    hID, BallP ossession, t, L = hhP ossessingP layer, pi i, hP ossessedObject, biii
    player(pi ), ball(b), Distance(pi , b, t) < Tid2
    ∀j 6= i, player(pj ), D(pj , b, t) > D(pi, b, t)
    ∀k = 1 . . . n, D(pi , b, t + k) < Tid2
    ∀k = 0 . . . n, ∀j 6= i, team(pj ) 6= team(pi ), D(pi , pj , t + k) < Tod2 ,
    speed(b, t + k) < Ts2


3. Tackle occurs when a player (TacklingPlayer) tries to gain control of the
   ball against a player of the opposite team (PossessingPlayer). As a direct
   consequence, the presence of a member of the opposite team nearby is a
   condition to trigger the event.

       hID, T ackle, t, L = hhP ossessingP layer, pi i, hT acklingP layer, pj ii,
       hP ossessedObject, bii,
       player(pi ), player(pj ), ball(b),
       Distance(pi , b, t) < Tid3
       ∀u . . . i, player(pu ), D(pu , b, t) > D(pi , b, t)
       ∀k = 1 . . . n, D(pi , b, t + k) < Tid3
       ∀k = 0 . . . n, ∃player(pi )|D(pi , pj , t + k) < Tod3 , team(pi ) 6= team(pj ),
       speed(b, t + k) < Ts3

4. BallDeflection occurs when the ball has a sudden change in direction,
   usually due to a player or the goalkeeper deflecting it. The ball in this event
   undergoes an intense deceleration reaching an area far from the deflecting
                                                          Slicing and dicing soccer   7

      player.

      hID, BallDef lection, t, L = hhDef lectingP layer, pi iiDef lectedObject, biii
      player(pi ), ball(b), Distance(pi , b, t) < Tid4
      ∀k = 1 . . . n, D(pi , b, t + k) < D(pi , b, t + k + 1),
      speed(b, t + n) > Ts4
      ∃k|acceleration(b, t + k) < −Ta4

 5. BallOut is triggered when the ball goes off the pitch.
 6. Goal occurs when a player scores a goal.


3.2     Complex event detector

This module was implemented based on a temporal logic; specifically the Tempo-
ral Interval Logic with Compositional Operators (TILCO) [8] was used. TILCO
belongs to the class of ITLs, where each event is associated to a time inter-
val. TILCO was selected among several available options because it implements
both qualitative and quantitative ordering, and defines a metric over time: thus,
we were able to impose constraints on the duration of the events, as well as to
gather statistics on their duration. The ETALIS (Event TrAnsaction Logic Infer-
ence System) open source library, based on Prolog, was used for implementation
[4]. The complex event detector is characterized by few parameters, which were
manually optimized on the training set.
     For the complex events, the rules were formalized as reported in the following.

 1. Pass and Cross events occur when the the ball is passed between two players
    of the same team, and hence can be expressed as a sequence of two atomic
    events, KickingTheBall and BallPossession, where the passing and receiving
    players belong to the same team. A cross is a special case in which the ball
    is passed from the sideline area of the field to the goal area. An additional
    clause is added to the pass detection (not reported for brevity) to evaluate
    the position of the players, straightforward in our case as the coordinate
    system coincides with the field.

                hID, P ass, (t, t + k), t, L = hID, KickingT heBall,
                hKickingP layer, pi , ti, hKickedObject, b, tii
                T HEN hID, BallP ossession, hP ossessingP layer, pj , t + ki,
                hP ossessedObject, b, tiii
                player(pi ), player(pj ), ball(b), team(pi ) = team(pj ), k < T h3
 2. FilteringPass allows to create goal opportunities when the opposite team
    have an organized defence. According to the UEFA definition, it consists of a
    pass over the defence line of the opposite team. In our definition, the player
    that receives the ball has to be, at the time the pass starts, nearer to the
8            L. Morra et al.

       goal post than all the players from the opposite team.

          hID, F ilteringP ass, t, t + k, t, L = hID, P ass, hP ossessingP layer, pi , ti,
          hReceivingP layer, pj , t + ki, hP ossessedObject, b, tiii
          player(pi ), player(pj ), ball(b), team(pi ) = team(pj ),
          ∀k, player(pk ), team(pk ) 6= team(pj ), goal(g, pk ),
          D(pj , g, t + k) < D(pk , g, t + k)

 3. PassThenGoal, CrossThenGoal and FilteringPassThenGoal are de-
    fined by the concatenation of two temporal sub-sequences: an alternation of
    Pass/FilteringPass/Cross followed by a Goal, where the receiver of the pass
    is the same player who scores.
 4. Tackle: as a complex event, it is a sequence of one or more atomic tackles,
    followed by a ball possession (which indicates the end of the action). A
    WonTackle terminates with the successful attempt to gain the ball by the
    opponent team. A LostTackle is obtained by the complementary rule.
 5. ShotOut, ShotThenGoal and SavedShot represent possible outcomes of
    an attempt to score. The SavedShot event, where the goalkeeper successfully
    intercepts the ball, is formalized as KickingTheBall followed by a BallDeflec-
    tion or BallPossession, where the deflecting player is the goal keeper.

3.3       Event recognition from a multi-view camera setup
In a real setting, spatio-temporal data would need to be extracted from a multi-
view video stream using a multi-object detection and tracking system (see Figure
2). A multi-camera setup is required in order to solve occlusions and cover the
entire playing field. For instance, Pettersen et al. used three wide-angle cam-
eras to cover the Alfheim stadium [12]; modern acquisition setup like Intel True
View c include up to 38 5K cameras. The players and the ball can be detected
using e.g., Single Shot Detector or another real-time object detector [7,13]. Pixel
coordinates are then mapped to the field coordinate systems using a properly
calibrated setup; alternatively, field lines can be used to estimate the calibra-
tion parameters [13]. For accurate event detection the system should be able
to distinguish and track different players, assign them to the correct team, and



                                                                                       BALL
                                                                                    POSSESSION
                                     Player                                             +
                                                                                                   PASS
                                    Detection                                        KICKING
                                                                                     THE BALL

       Video       Video to field               Multi - object   Position and         Atomic     Complex
                                      Ball
    multi-camera    coordinate      Detection    tracking      feature extraction    detection   detection
     acquisition     mapping




            Fig. 2: Deployment of the proposed system in a real-life scenario.
                                                   Slicing and dicing soccer     9

minimize identity switches during tracking. For instance, certain events can only
occur between players of the same team, other between players of competing
teams. Developing the detection and tracking system is beyond the scope of this
paper. Instead, we exploit the game engine to log the position of the players
and the ball at each frame, and focus on the final event detection step, which is
further divided into atomic and complex event detection.


4     Experimental results
In this section, the evaluation protocol and the experimental results of the pro-
posed detector on the SoccER dataset are reported. We focus first on the de-
tection of atomic events, for which optimal parameters were found by means of
a multi-objective genetic algorithm. Starting from the optimal solution of the
atomic event detector, the performance of the complex event detector is analyzed
and compared with the state of the art.

4.1   Evaluation protocol
A ground truth atomic event is detected if an event of the same type is found
within a temporal window of three frames. For complex events, we use the com-
mon OV20 criterion for temporal action recognition: a temporal window matches
a ground truth action if they overlap, according to the Intersection over Union,
by 20% or more [5]. For each event, we calculate the recall, precision and F-score.

4.2   Parameter optimization: an evolutionary strategy
Genetic or evolutionary algorithms are effective techniques for parameter opti-
mization, as they only require the ability to evaluate the fitness function and
are applicable when an analytic formulation of the loss is not available [11]. In
our case, the fitness value is based on the weighted average of the recall and
precision metrics over all the event types. Since precision and recall are compet-
ing requirements, we opted for a multi-objective implementation, the Strength
Pareto Evolutionary Algorithm or SPEA2 [19]. SPEA2 is a Pareto-based opti-
mization technique which seeks to approximate the Pareto-optimal set, i.e., the
set of individuals that are not dominated by any others, while maximizing the
diversity of the generated solutions.
    Each individual’s genome encodes the set of 16 parameters associated to
all rules. The parameters of each rule are defined in Section 3.1 (i.e.,Inner
Distance(TidN ), Outer Distance(TodN ), speed(TsN ) and accelleration(TaN ), where
N ranges from 1 to 4). In addition, the window for each rule is separately opti-
mized. Finally, since the rules are not mutually exclusive, the order in which they
are evaluated is also encoded using the Lehmer notation. A range and discretiza-
tion step is defined for each real-valued parameter to limit the search space. All
window sizes are limited in the range 3–30 frames (with unitary step), all thresh-
olds on speed were limited in the range 1–15 with step 1.0, and all thresholds
10               L. Morra et al.


                                                               Metrics     KtB    BallP   Tackle   BallD   Avg
                                                      KtB      Precision   0,96   0,96    0,96     0,97    0,96
                                                               Recall      0,92   0,87    0,91     0,86    0,93
         0.70                                                  Fscore      0,94   0,91    0,93     0,91    0,94
                                                      BallP    Precision   0,99   0,99    0,99     0,99    0,99
         0.65                                                  Recall      0,88   0,91    0,87     0,86    0,88
Recall




                                                               Fscore      0,93   0,95    0,93     0,92    0,93
         0.60                                         Tackle   Precision   0,95   0,97    0,87     0,96    0,94
                                                               Recall      0,6    0,42    0,65     0,47    0,61
         0.55                                                  Fscore      0,73   0,59    0,74     0,63    0,74
                                                      BallD    Precision   0,28   0,28    0,26     0,26    0,27
         0.50                                                  Recall      0,37   0,36    0,39     0,39    0,35
            0.70 0.72 0.74 0.76 0.78 0.80 0.82 0.84
                              Precision                        Fscore      0,32   0,31    0,31     0,31    0,31

                             (a)                                                  (b)

Fig. 3: Visualization of the Pareto front after 50 generations (a) and performance
of the four best solutions generated (b). In (a) each dot represents a possible
solution, and those belonging to the Pareto front are highlighted in red. In (b),
each column represents the solution which maximize the F-score with respect
to a specific event: KickingTheBall (KtB), BallPossession (BallP), Tackle and
BallDeflection (BallD). For each event (row), the average performance is reported
in the last column.




on distance were limited in the range 0.1–2.0 meters with step 0.1. The genetic
algorithm was run for 50 generations starting from a population of 200 individ-
uals; genetic operators were the BLX-0.5 crossover [1], with probability 90%,
and random mutation with probability 20%. An archive of 100 individuals was
used to store the Pareto front. The optimal parameters were determined on the
training set and evaluated on the testing set. The experiment was repeated twice
to ensure, qualitatively, the reproducibility of the results. Genetic algorithms are
sensitive to random initialization and more runs would be needed to estimate
the variability in the results.
    The final set of solutions, which approximate the Pareto front, is shown in
Fig. 3a. The four solutions which maximize F-score for each event are compared
in Fig. 3. The BallOut event (not reported) reaches perfect scores for all param-
eter choices. The easiest events to detect are KickingTheBall, with an average
F-score of 0.94, and BallPossession, with an average F-score of 0.93. For Tackle,
the average precision is high (0.94), but the recall is much lower (0.61). The
worst result is obtained for BallDeflection, with values of F-score consistently
lower than 0.4. Some events are more difficult to detect based on positional data
alone, i.e., without considering the position of the joints or the action performed
by the players [10]. The best performing solution for the Tackle event (0.65 vs.
0.42 recall) corresponds to a lower recall for BallPossession (0.91 vs. 0.87), largely
due to the similarity between the two classes; the difference in absolute values
is easily explained by the higher frequency of BallPossession events.
                                                    Slicing and dicing soccer    11




       (a) Window size       (b) Ball-player distance       (c) Ball Speed

Fig. 4: Distribution (mean and standard deviation) of each parameter of the rule
KickingTheBall calculated over the entire population at each iteration.


4.3   Parameters Evolution
The distribution of the parameter values at different iterations provides addi-
tional insight on the role of each parameter and the effectiveness of each rule. Two
competing factors are responsible for the convergence towards specific parame-
ter values: lack of diversity in the population, leading to premature convergence,
and the existence of a narrow range of optimal values for a given parameter.
We ruled out the first factor by repeating the experiment: we assume that pa-
rameters that converge to a stable value across multiple runs are more critical
to the overall performance, especially if they are associated to high detection
performance.
    Let us consider for instance the parameters for the KickingTheBall rule,
represented in Fig. 4. The window size and distance threshold both converge to
a very narrow range, suggesting that a strong local minimum was found. On the
other hand, the threshold on the ball speed appears less critical.
    Other parameters tend to behave in a similar way, although there are excep-
tions. Generally speaking, the system is very sensitive to the distance thresholds,
and in fact they converge to very narrow ranges for all events except BallDe-
flection (results are not reported for brevity). For most events, the window size
has a larger variance then KickingTheBall and, in general, the rules seem quite
robust with respect to the choice of this parameter.
    The existence of an optimal parameter value is not necessarily associated to
a high detection performance: for instance, the distribution of the acceleration
threshold for the BallDeflection has a very low standard deviation and very
high mean (not shown), as the change of direction usually causes an abrupt
acceleration. At the same time, acceleration alone is probably not sufficient to
recognize the event. Finally, the order in which the rules are processed does not
seem to play a fundamental role.

4.4   Overall performance
The performance for complex events (precision and recall) is reported in Fig. 5.
In eight out of 11 cases, the system was able to reach an F-score between 0.8
12            L. Morra et al.


                                                 Events comparison
 120
         94             100           100                        100                                  100 100
 100          84   89                            83 86      88                           89   87 88                  83
                                                                                    74
    80                                      67
    60                        45 43                                                                             49
    40                                                                      24 28
    20
     0




                                                     Precision     Recall



                        Fig. 5: Precision and Recall for each complex event


and 1. Sequences of events, such as passes that result in a goal, can be detected
effectively. However, performance suffers when the detection of the atomic events
is not accurate, e.g., for Tackle and SavedShot, which depend on the atomic
events Tackle and BallDeflection, respectively.
    Comparison with previous literature is difficult due to differences in the
datasets, experimental settings, and types of events. Few previous works were
based on positional data, extracted either from wearable trackers or using cam-
eras covering the entire field [14,15,10]. In the latter case, the accuracy of the
positional data may further vary, depending on whether the ball and players are
manually identified [14] or detected by a multi-object detector and tracker [10].
    Despite these limitations, in Table 2 we attempt a comparison for two events:
pass (complex event) and kicking the ball (atomic event). For both events, our
results are comparable or better than previous literature, confirming that the
proposed events can be successfully detected using (i) positional data (as in
[14,15]) and (ii) temporal logic (as in [7]). It should be noticed that the SoccER
dataset is much larger than those used in competing approaches, , including
1,203 passes and 1,728 kicking the ball events: datasets included in Table 2
range between 14 and 134 events).


5        Discussion and conclusions

Event recognition in soccer is a challenging task due to the complexity of the
game, the number of players and the subtle differences among different actions.
In this work, we introduce the SoccER dataset, which is generated by an auto-
matic system built upon the open source Gameplay Football engine. With this
contribution, we strive to alleviate the lack of large scale datasets for training
and validating event recognition systems. We modified the Gameplay Football
engine to log positional data, as could be generated by a fixed multi-camera
setup covering the whole field. Compared to the use of broadcast footage, we are
                                                     Slicing and dicing soccer     13

 Solution         Input          Method               Precision Recall F-score
                                  kicking the ball
 Richly (2017) positional data feature extraction +     95%      92%    93%
 [14]                            neural networks
 Khan (2018) [7] broadcast video object detection +       -      92%    89%
                                 temporal logic
 Ours            positional data temporal logic         96%      93%    94%
                                         pass
 Khan (2018) [7] broadcast video object detection +     94%      84%    89%
                                 temporal logic
 Richly (2016) positional data feature extraction + 42.6%       64.7%   51%
 [14]                            SVM
 Lee (2017) [10] Fixed camera, Action recognition +       -      60%      -
                 entire pitch    finite state machine
 Ours            positional data temporal logic         96%      93%    94%
    Table 2: Comparison between state of the art and proposed approach.




thus able to consider the position of all players at once and model sequences of
complex and related events that occur across the entire field. In the future, the
game engine could be further extended to generate data on-the-fly, e.g., for the
training of deep neural networks.
    A second contribution is the design and validation of ITLs for soccer event
recognition. ITLs provide a compact and flexible representation for events, ex-
ploiting readily available domain knowledge, given that sports are governed by
a well-defined set of rules. The capability of reasoning about events is key to de-
tect with high accuracy complex chains of events, such as “passes that resulted
in a scored goal”, bypassing the need for extensive training and data collection.
Relationships between events are also easy encoded.
    Spatio-temporal positional data in the SoccER dataset may be more accurate
than those extracted from real video streams, as explained in Section 3.3. Pre-
vious works reported a tracking accuracy of about 90% for the players and 70%
for the ball in a multi-camera setup [10]. It is possible to accurately and fairly
compare different event detection techniques using synthetic data. Nonetheless,
investigating the performance on real video streams, in the presence of noise,
will require further investigation.
    In conclusion, we have shown that ITLs are capable of accurately detect-
ing most events from positional data extracted from untrimmed soccer video
streams. Future work will exploit the SoccER dataset for comparing other event
detection techniques, for instance based on machine learning [6].


References
 1. Alcalá, R., Gacto, M.J., Herrera, F., Alcalá-Fdez, J.: A multi-objective genetic
    algorithm for tuning and rule selection to obtain accurate and compact linguis-
14     L. Morra et al.

    tic fuzzy rule-based systems. International Journal of Uncertainty, Fuzziness and
    Knowledge-Based Systems 15(05), 539–557 (2007)
 2. Anicic, D., Fodor, P., Stuhmer, R., Stojanovic, N.: Event-driven approach for logic-
    based complex event processing. In: 2009 International Conference on Computa-
    tional Science and Engineering. vol. 1, pp. 56–63. IEEE (2009)
 3. Cannavó, A., Calandra, D., Basilicó, G., Lamberti, F.: Automatic recognition of
    sport events from spatio-temporal data: An application for virtual reality-based
    training in basketball. In: 14th International Conference on Computer Graphics
    Theory and Applications (GRAPP 2019). pp. 310–316. SCITEPRESS (2019)
 4. D.Anicic, P. Fodor, R.S.: Etalis home. http://code.google.com/p/etalis
 5. Gaidon, A., Harchaoui, Z., Schmid, C.: Actom sequence models for efficient action
    detection. In: CVPR 2011. pp. 3201–3208. IEEE (2011)
 6. Giancola, S., Amine, M., Dghaily, T., Ghanem, B.: Soccernet: A scalable dataset
    for action spotting in soccer videos. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on
    Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops. pp. 1711–1721 (2018)
 7. Khan, A., Lazzerini, B., Calabrese, G., Serafini, L.: Soccer event detection. In:
    4th International Conference on Image Processing and Pattern Recognition (IPPR
    2018). pp. 119–129. AIRCC Publishing Corporation (2018)
 8. Konur, S.: Real-time and probabilistic temporal logics: An overview. Computing
    Research Repository - CORR (05 2010)
 9. Kurach, K., Raichuk, A., Stanczyk, P., Zajac, M., Bachem, O., Espeholt, L.,
    Riquelme, C., Vincent, D., Michalski, M., Bousquet, O., Gelly, S.: Google research
    football: A novel reinforcement learning environment. CoRR (2019)
10. Lee, J., Nam, D., Moon, S., Lee, J., Yoo, W.: Soccer event recognition technique
    based on pattern matching. In: 2017 Federated Conference on Computer Science
    and Information Systems (FedCSIS). pp. 643–646 (Sep 2017)
11. Morra, L., Coccia, N., Cerquitelli, T.: Optimization of computer aided detection
    systems: An evolutionary approach. Expert Systems With Applications 100, 145–
    156 (2018)
12. Pettersen, S.A., Johansen, D., Johansen, H., Berg-Johansen, V., Gaddam, V.R.,
    Mortensen, A., Langseth, R., Griwodz, C., Stensland, H.K., Halvorsen, P.: Soccer
    video and player position dataset. In: Proceedings of the 5th ACM Multimedia
    Systems Conference. p. 1823. MMSys 14, Association for Computing Machinery,
    New York, NY, USA (2014)
13. Rematas, K., Kemelmacher-Shlizerman, I., Curless, B., Seitz, S.: Soccer on your
    tabletop. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
    Recognition. pp. 4738–4747 (2018)
14. Richly, K., Bothe, M., Rohloff, T., Schwarz, C.: Recognizing compound events in
    spatio-temporal football data. In: International Conference on Internet of Things
    and Big Data. vol. 2, pp. 27–35. SCITEPRESS (2016)
15. Richly, K., Moritz, F., Schwarz, C.: Utilizing artificial neural networks to detect
    compound events in spatio-temporal soccer data (08 2017)
16. Schuiling, B.K.: Gameplay football, https://github.com/BazkieBumpercar/GameplayFootball
17. Shih, H.C.: A survey of content-aware video analysis for sports. IEEE Transactions
    on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology 28(5), 1212–1231 (2017)
18. Tovinkere, V., Qian, R.J.: Detecting semantic events in soccer games: towards a
    complete solution. In: IEEE International Conference on Multimedia and Expo,
    2001. ICME 2001. pp. 833–836 (Aug 2001)
19. Zitzler, E., Laumanns, M., Thiele, L.: SPEA2: Improving the strength pareto evo-
    lutionary algorithm for multiobjective optimization. In: Proceedings of the EURO-
    GEN’2001 Conference. pp. 95–100. Athens, Greece (2001)
