                                               H OW A L OSING T EAM LIKE THE C ANADIENS CAN S TEAL A S TANLEY C UP :
                                                         A Q UANTITATIVE I NTRANSITIVE H OCKEY A NALYSIS


                                               C. J. Barrett* , S. Koumarianos, O. Mermut, York University (Toronto); McGill University (Montreal), Canada.
arXiv:2105.13472v2 [math.HO] 17 Jun 2021




                                                                                    submitted: 17 June 2021, to: arXiv.org


                                           Dedicated to the Canadian academics who volunteered their mathematical expertise to epidemiological modeling
                                           2020–2021. On the occasion of Canada’s latest hockey playoff effort towards bringing Lord Stanley’s Cup back home
                                           for the first time since 1993, by pulling off one of the most unlikely underdog upsets in professional hockey history.

                                                                                                 A BSTRACT
                                                     We present here a simple mathematical model that provides a successful strategy, quantitatively, to
                                                     ending the continued championship futility experienced by Canadian Hockey Teams. Competitive
                                                     Intransitivity is used here as a simple predictive framework to capture how investing strategically,
                                                     under a uniform salary cap, in just 3 independently variable aspects of the sport (such as Offence,
                                                     Defence, and a Goaltender), by just 3 Hockey Teams applying differing salary priorities (such as
                                                     Montreal, Boston, and New York), can lead to rich and perhaps surprisingly unexpected outcomes
                                                     in play, similar to rolling intransitive dice together in a series of head-to-head games. A possibly
                                                     fortunate conclusion of this analysis is the prediction that for any Team’s chosen strategy (such as
                                                     New York’s), a counter strategy within the same salary cap can be adopted by a playoff opponent
                                                     (such as Montreal) which will prove victorious over a long playoff series, enabling a pathway to end
                                                     prolonged championship futility.

                                           1     Assumptions of this Model
                                           We construct here a simple description of Hockey Playoffs as between just 3 Teams (such as: Montreal, Boston, and
                                           New York), where each Team possesses different strengths in just 3 independent competitive variables (such as Offence,
                                           Defence, and a Goalie), represented by different whole numbers (such as $ millions), summing to the same total (a
                                           ’salary cap’ such as $6 million /Team). Such ’Goalie-centred’, ’balanced’ and ’Offence-Defence’ spending could be
                                           represented, for example as:



                                                          Offence ($M)      Defence ($M)      Goalie ($M)
                                               Montreal         1                1                 4
                                                Boston          2                2                 2
                                               New York         3                3                 0



                                           The Model is run by assuming that each pair of Teams plays each other over a long series (approaching ∞), and
                                           that the winner of that series is the Team who wins the most ’head-to-head matchups’ of these 9 possible com-
                                           binations of competitive variables, similar to rolling differing dice against each other many times, to see which die ’wins’.

                                           Which strategy is best? i.e.: is it better for New York to spend so much on Offence and Defence, or for Montreal to
                                           concentrate resources in their Goalie, or does Boston end up victorious with balanced spending?
2   Results from the Model
The 9 independent ‘head-to-head matchups’ between each pair of Teams facing each other in a Playoff Series, might be
easily visualized as rolling 3 different coloured dice, representing the 3 Teams’ weighting strategies in Offence, Defence,
and Goalie variables (repeating the same 3 numbers on the backside of each 6-sided die).
Playoff Series Winners can be presented by charting results of the 9 possible match-ups, then declaring as winner the
Team who out-rolls their opponent in the majority of the 9 possible combinations, for e,g,:

                     BOS                                                                 NY
                              2        2        2                                                3      3       0
          MTL                                                                 BOS
                 1          BOS      BOS      BOS                                    2         NY      NY     BOS
                 1          BOS      BOS      BOS                                    2         NY      NY     BOS
                 4          MTL      MTL      MTL                                    2         NY      NY     BOS

Where (left) in a matchup with Goalie-heavy Montreal, a balanced Boston Team would be expected to prevail eventually,
‘winning’ 6 of the possible 9 total matchups of Team strength. Similarly (right), Boston then playing an Offence-Defence
 oriented New York Team would be expected to be defeated, again in 6 out of 9 possible matchups. Since New York
 triumphs over Boston, after Boston has clearly vanquished Montreal, one might be tempted to assume that a New York
 vs Montreal final would be as easily predictable as: NY > BOS > MTL, so therefore: NY > MTL ?
A Possibly Unexpected Final Outcome can be confirmed by the match-up chart between Montreal and New York
(below), where examining results of the 9 combinations reveals that in only 4 of 9 matchups does New York prevail, yet
underdog Montreal emerges victorious overall, winning 5 of 9 matchups, and thus defeating the New York Team. Such
possibly surprising yet fortuitous final outcomes can be described as ‘intransitive’, with much written elsewhere about
such potentially unexpected and apparently undeserving outcomes, using many variations of such intransitive dice.

                                                      NY
                                                               3        3        0
                                           MTL
                                                  1          NY       NY       MTL
                                                  1          NY       NY       MTL
                                                  4          MTL      MTL      MTL

3   Conclusions
It is demonstrated here by this Model that for any distribution of funding adopted by any Team (for example: Boston or
New York) under a uniform salary cap, a superior winning distribution of the same resources can be adopted by their
opponent (such as: Montreal) to ensure final victory, and a welcomed end to prolonged championship futility.

4   Acknowledgements & Competing Interests
Profs. C.B. and O.M. are grateful to NSERC Canada for research support. The Canadian Broadcasting Corporation
is thanked for open broadcast of ‘Hockey Night in Canada’ during which this collaborative paper was written, and
Moosehead Breweries Limited (St. John, NB). The authors declare no competing interests, aside from traditional
geographical hockey allegiances.

References
[1] Wikipedia contributors. Intransitive dice — Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia, 2021. [Online; accessed 24-May-2021].
[2] Martin Gardner. The paradox of nontransitive dice and the elusive principle of indifference. Scientific American, 223(6):110,
    1970.
[3] Robert Leonard. Von Neumann, Morgenstern, and the creation of game theory: From chess to social science, 1900–1960.
    Cambridge University Press, 2010.
[4] Shalosh B Ekhad and Doron Zeilberger. A treatise on sucker’s bets. arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.10344, 2017.



                                                               2
