 A Comprehensive Review of Computer Vision in Sports: Open Issues,
                              Future Trends and Research Directions
                1
                    Banoth Thulasya Naika, 2Mohammad Farukh Hashmia, 3Neeraj Dhanraj Bokdeb,*
 a
     Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Warangal, India
     b
         Department of Engineering - Renewable Energy and Thermodynamics, Aarhus University, 8000, Denmark
                1
                thulasyramsingh@student.nitw.ac.in, 2mdfarukh@nitw.ac.in, 3,neerajdhanraj@mpe.au.dk

Abstract:
Recent developments in video analysis of sports and computer vision techniques have achieved significant
improvements to enable a variety of critical operations. To provide enhanced information, such as detailed
complex analysis in sports like soccer, basketball, cricket, badminton, etc., studies have focused mainly on
computer vision techniques employed to carry out different tasks. This paper presents a comprehensive
review of sports video analysis for various applications high-level analysis such as detection and
classification of players, tracking player or ball in sports and predicting the trajectories of player or ball,
recognizing the teams strategies, classifying various events in sports. The paper further discusses published
works in a variety of application-specific tasks related to sports and the present researchers views regarding
them. Since there is a wide research scope in sports for deploying computer vision techniques in various
sports, some of the publicly available datasets related to a particular sport have been provided. This work
reviews a detailed discussion on some of the artificial intelligence (AI) applications in sports vision, GPU-
based work stations, and embedded platforms. Finally, this review identifies the research directions,
probable challenges, and future trends in the area of visual recognition in sports.

Keywords: Sports, Ball Detection, Player Tracking, Artificial Intelligence, Computer Vision, Embedded
Platforms, Research Directions in Sports
1 Introduction:
        Automatic analysis of video in sports is a possible solution to the demands of fans and professionals
for various kinds of information. Analyzing videos in sports has provided a wide range of applications,
which include player positions, extraction of ball’s trajectory, content extraction and indexing,
summarization, detection of highlights, on demand 3D reconstruction, animations, generation of virtual
view, editorial content creation, virtual content insertion, visualization and enhancement of content, game
play analysis and evaluations, identifying player’s actions, referee decisions and other fundamental
elements required for the analysis of a game.

The task of player detection (identification) and tracking is very difficult because of many challenges, which
include similar appearance of subjects, complex occlusions, unconstrained field environment, background,
unpredictable movements, unstable camera motion, issues with calibration of low textured fields and the
editing done to broadcast video, lower pixel resolution of players who are distant and smaller in the frame,
motion blur etc. The simultaneous detection of players the ball and tracking them at once is quite
challenging, because of the zigzag movements of the ball and player, change of ball from player to player,
severe occlusion between players and ball, etc., and hence this study presents a survey of detection,
classification, tracking, trajectory prediction and recognizing the team’s strategies etc. in various sports.
Detection and tracking of player is the only major requirement in some sports like cycling, swimming etc.
As a result, as illustrated in Figure 1, this research classifies all sports into two categories: player-centered
sports and ball-centered sports, with extensive analysis in Section 4.

Recent developments in video analysis of sports have a focus on the features of computer vision techniques
which are used to perform certain operations for which these are assigned, such as detailed complex analysis
like detection and classification of each player based on their team in every frame or by recognizing the
jersey number to classify players based on their team will helps to classify various events where the player
is involved. In higher level analysis, such as tracking the player or ball, many more such evaluations are to
be considered for the evaluation of a player’s skills, detecting the team’s strategies, events and the formation
of tactical positions such as mid field analysis in various sports like soccer, basketball etc., and also various
sports vision applications such as smart assistants, virtual umpires, assistance coaches etc., have been
discussed in Section 7. A higher level semantic interpretation is an effective substitute, especially in
situations requiring real time analysis and minimal human intervention for exploitation of the delivered
system outputs.
                             Figure 1 Classification of different types of sports

The main task of video summarization or highlight extraction is extracting key events of the game which
provides users with an ability to view highlights as per their interests. For this purpose, it is required to
detect, classify gestures, recognize the actions of referee/umpire, track players and the ball in key events
like the time of goal scoring to analyze and classify different types of shots performed by players. The
framework for processing and analyzing task-specific events in sports applications, such as playfield
extraction, detection, and tracking of player/ball, etc. has been shown in figure 2, and detailed analyses of
playfield extraction are discussed in Section 3.

A detailed review of research in the above-mentioned domains has been presented in this article and the
data has compiled from papers which focus on computer vision based approaches that are used for each
application, followed by inspecting key points and weaknesses, thereby investigating whether these
methodologies in their current state of implementation can be utilized in real time sports video analysis
systems.
        Figure 2 Framework of processing and analysis of different applications in sports video

1.1 Features of the Proposed Review

    Some of the surveys and reviews published in different sports video processing and their main
contributions are discussed and summarized in table 1 and listed below.

       D. Y. W. Tan et al. [1] researched on badminton movement analysis such as Badminton smashing,
        badminton service recognition, badminton swing and shuttle trajectory analysis.
       Robson P B et al. [2] presented a systematic review of sports data mining, which discusses the
        current panorama, themes, the dataset used, algorithms and research opportunities.
       N A Rahmad et al. [3] presented a survey on video based sports intelligence systems to recognize
        sports actions. They provided video based action recognition frameworks used in sports field and
        also discussed deep learning implementation in video based sports action recognition. They
        proposed a flexible method which classifies actions in different sports with different context and
        features as part of future research.
     Eline K et al. [4] presented an overview of 17 human motion capture systems which report the
      specs given by the manufacturer as well as calibration specs. This review helps researchers in the
      selection of a suitable motion capture system for experimental setups in various sports.
     M Manaffifard et al. [5] presented a survey on state-of-the-art (SOTA) algorithms for player
      tracking in soccer videos. They analyzed strengths and weaknesses of different approaches and
      presented the evaluation criteria for future research.
     Graham Thomas et al. [6] presented an analysis of computer vision based applications and research
      topics in sports field. They summarized some of the commercially available systems such as camera
      tracking and player tracking systems. They also incorporated some of the available datasets of
      different sports.
     Emily E C et al. [7] presented systematic review of literature on machine learning and deep learning
      for sports-specific movement recognition using inertial measurement unit and or computer vision
      data.
     PR Kamble et al. [8] presented an exhaustive survey of all the published research work on ball
      tracking in a categorical manner and also reviews the used techniques, their performance,
      advantages, and limitations with their suitability for a particular sport.
     HC Shih et al. [9] introduced the fundamentals of content analysis such as sports genre
      classification, and the overall status of sports video analytics. Also reviewed SOTA studies with
      prominent challenges identified in literature.
     Ryan Beal et al. [10] explored AI techniques that have been applied to challenges within a team
      sports such as match outcome prediction, tactical decision making, player investments, and injury
      prediction.
     Apostolidis E et al. [11] suggested a taxonomy of the existing algorithms and presented a systematic
      review of the relevant literature that shows the evolution of the deep learning based video
      summarization technologies.
     Yewande Adesida [289] explored a review to better understand the usage of wearable technology
      in sports to improve performance and avoid injury.
     Manju Rana [290] offered a thorough overview of the literature on the use of wearable inertial
      sensors for performance measurement in various sports.

                Table 1 Summary of Previous Survey and Reviews in different Sports

                Hand        Machine                 Sport and Application                    Discussed
Ref            crafted     Learning                                         Classification    about      Aim of Review
                                         Sport      Detection   Tracking
              Algorithms   Algorithms                                            and          Dataset
                                                                               Movement
                                                                              Recognition
  D. Y. W.
  Tan et al.                                             ×           ×                         ×         Motion analysis
     [1]                               Badminton                                  
 Robson P B
                                            -            -          -                                Sports data mining
  et al. [2]                                                                       -
     NA
 Rahmad et         ×                         -                      ×                                          -
    al. [3]                                                                        
  Eline K et
                               ×             -           ×           ×                         ×         Motion Capture
    al. [4]                                                                        
      M
                                                                                                               Player
 Manaffifard       ×                      Soccer                                             ×
                                                                                                         detection/tracking
  et al. [5]                                                                       -
   Graham
                                                                                                          Availability of
 Thomas et         ×                         -                                               
                                                                                                         datasets for sports
    al. [6]                                                                        ×
 Emily E C
                   ×                         -           ×           ×                         ×                 -
  et al. [7]                                                                       
 PR Kamble
                                         Soccer                                             ×          Ball Tracking
  et al. [8]                                                                       ×
 HC Shih et                                                                                               Content-Aware
                                            -                       ×                         ×
    al. [9]                                                                                                  Analysis
 Ryan Beal
                   ×                         -           ×           ×                        ×                 -
  et al. [10]
 Apostolidis                                                                                                   Video
                   ×                         -           ×           ×            ×            
 E et al. [11]                                                                                            Summarization
  Yewande                                                                                                    Wearable
   Adesida                     x             -            -          -            -            ×          technology in
    [289]                                                                                                      sports
                                                                                                             Wearable
   Manju
                               x             -            -                                  ×          technology in
 Rana [290]
                                                                                                               sports



The proposed survey mainly focuses on providing a proper and comprehensive survey of research carried
out in computer vision based sports video analysis for various applications such as detection and
classification of players, tracking player or ball and predicting the trajectories of player or ball, recognizing
the team’s strategies, classifying various events in sports field etc. and in particular, establishing a pathway
for next-generation research in the sports domain. The features of this review are:

       In contrast to recently published review papers in the sports field, this article comprehensively
        reviews statistics of studies in various sports and various AI algorithms that have been used to cover
        various aspects viewed and verified in sports.
       It provides road map of various AI algorithms selection and evaluation criteria and also provided
        some of the publicly available datasets of different sports.
       It discusses various GPU-based embedded platforms for real time object detection and tracking
        framework to improve the performance and accuracy of edge devices.
       Besides, it demonstrates various applications in sports vision and possible research directions.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides statistical details of research in sports.
Section 3 presents extraction data vis-a-vis various sports play fields, followed by a broader dimension that
covers a wide range of sports and is reviewed in section 4. Some of the available datasets for various sports
along and embedded platforms have been reviewed in section 5 and 6. Section 7 provides various
application-specific tasks in the field of sports vision. Section 8 covers potential research directions, as well
as different challenges to be overcome in sports studies. Last, but not the least, Section 9 concludes by
describing the final considerations.


2 Statistics of Studies in Sports
Detection of the positions of the players at any given point of time is the basic step for tracking a player,
which is also needed for graphics systems in sports for analysis and getting pictures of key moments in a
game. Equipment and methods used in commercial broadcast analysis systems range from those depending
on a manual operator clicking on the feet of the players with a calibrated camera image to an automated
technique that involves segmentation to identify areas which likely correspond to players. For improvement
of the performance of teams in sports like soccer, volleyball, hockey, badminton etc., analyzing the
movements of players individually, and the real time formation of the teams, can provide a valuable real
time insight for the coach of that team.

On obtaining a number of articles from various resources, the research articles are selected based on peer
review, ranging from high impact factor online sources in the domain of player/ball/referee detection and
tracking in sports, classification of objects in sports, behaviour and performance analysis of players, gesture
recognition of referees/umpires, automatic highlight detection and score updating etc. Figure 3 provides
overall information of sports research publications in past five years considered in this comprehensive
survey article.

   40
   35
   30
   25
   20
   15
   10
     5
     0
                  2001-15                2016-17                2018-19                 2020-21
                                  IEEE      Elsevier     Springer      Others
                              Figure 3 Sports research progress in past five years



Figure 4 provides the statistics of studies of various sports in various applications such as detecting/tracking
the player and ball, trajectory prediction, classification, video summarization etc. which are published in
various standard journals as presented in figure 3.


                          All Sports                           Basketball
                              21%                                 15%




                  Badminton
                    4%
                                                                            Soccer
                   Cricket                                                   26%
                    13%



                                                                Hockey/Ice-hovkey
                               Tennis         Volleyball              6%
                                 9%               6%
                                    Figure 4 Sports wise research progress
3 Play Field Extraction in Various Sports
Detection of the sports field plays an important role in sports video analysis. Detection of playfield region
has two objectives. One is to detect the playfield region from non-playfield areas as presented in [7], while
the other is to identify primary objects from the background by filtering out redundant pixels such as grass,
court lines. This provides a reduced pixel which requires processing and reduction of errors for simplifying
player or ball detection and tracking phases, event extraction, pose detection etc. The challenges here
include distinguishing the color of the playfield from that of the stadium, lighting conditions and sometimes
weather, viewing angles and the shadows. Therefore, an accurate segmentation of the playfield cannot be
achieved just by processing the color of the playfield under certain situations and making it constant without
updating the statistics throughout the game. There is also an added noise when the player’s dress matches
that of the ground, and there appear shadows at the base of a player from different sources of light.
Gaussian-based background subtraction technique [12] which is implemented using computer vision
methods, generates the foreground mask as shown in figure 5.




                                  Figure 5 Background subtraction model
Researchers have used a single dominant color for detecting the playfield. Accordingly, some researchers
have utilized the features of images in which illumination is not affected by transforming the images from
RGB space to HIS [13, 14, and 15], YCbCr [16], normalized RGB [17, 18, 19].

For a precise capture of the movements of the players, tracking the ball and actions of referees, etc. on the
field or court, it is necessary to calibrate the camera [5, 8] and also to use an appropriate number of cameras
to cover the field. Though, some algorithms are capable of tracking the players, some other objects are also
needed to be tracked in the dynamically complex situations of interest for detailed analysis of the events
and extraction of the data of the subject of interest. Y Ohno et al. [20] presented an approach to extract the
play field and track the players and ball using multiple cameras in soccer video. In [21, 22] presented an
architecture which uses single (figure 6 (a)) and multi camera (figure 6 (c)) to capture a clear view of players
and ball in various challenging and tricky situations such as severe occlusions, missing of the ball from the
frames, etc. To estimate the players trajectory and team classification in [23, 24] presented a bird’s eye
view of the field to capture players precisely as shown in figure 6 (b). Various positions of the camera for
capturing the entire field is presented in [25, 26] to detect and track the players/ball and estimating the
position of the players etc.




        Figure 6 (a) Ceiling Mounted Camera                      Figure 6 (b) Birds eye view of Field
                     Figure 6 (c) Multiple Cameras placed to cover complete playfield



Morphological operations-based techniques can separate the playfield and non-playfield regions, but they
cannot detect the lines in the playfield. The background subtraction based techniques generate foreground
regions by subtracting the background frame from the current frame (i.e. by detecting moving objects in
the frame), however they fails to detect the playfield lines as shown in figure 5. So, the best way to detect
the playfield lines is by labeling the data as playfield lines (as shown in figure 7(a)), advertisements (as
shown in figure 7(b)), and the non-playfield regions as shown in figure 7(c). Training the model using a
dataset that is labeled as playfield lines, advertisements, and the non-playfield region as shown in figure 8
can detect and classify the playfield lines, advertisements, and the non-playfield region, which reduces the
detection of false positives and false negatives.




   Figure 7 Background labeled samples from the dataset a) Playfield lines b) Advertisements c) Non-
                                              playfield region.
4 Literature Review
In this section, the overview of traditional computer-vision methods implemented for major application
specifics in sports (such as detection, events classification/recognizing, tracking and trajectory prediction
etc.) investigated by the researchers and their significant limitations has been discussed.

4.1 Basketball
Basketball is played by two teams of five players each. The object of the game is to score more points than
opponent. The ball is passed, thrown, bounced, batted, or rolled from one player to another. Physical contact
with an opponent can result in a foul if the contact impedes the desired movement of the player. The advent
of computer vision techniques have effectively replaced manual analysis of tennis sports with fully
automated systems. Recognizing the player action and classifying the events [27, 28, 29] in basketball
videos helps to analyze the player performance. Player/ball detection and tracking in basketball videos is
carried out in [30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35] but fails in assigning specific identification to avoid the identity
switching among the players when they crossed. By estimating the pose of the player, the trajectory of the
ball [36, 37] is estimated from various distances to the basket. By recognizing and classifying the referee
signals [38], player behaviour can be assessed and highlights of the game can be extracted [39]. The
behaviour of a basketball team [40] can be characterized by the dynamics of space creation presented in
[41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46] that works to counteract space creation dynamics with defensive play presented in
[47]. By detecting a specific location of the player and ball in the basketball court, the player movement
can be predicted [48] and the ball trajectory [49, 50, 51] can be generated in three-dimensional which is a
complicated task. It is also necessary to study the extraction of basketball players’ shooting motion
trajectory, combined with the image feature analysis method of basketball shooting, to reconstruct and
quantitatively track the basketball players’ shooting motion trajectory [52, 53, 54, 55]. However, it is
difficult to analyze the game data for each play such as the ball tracking or motion of the players in the
game, because the situation of the game changes rapidly, and the structure of the data should be
complicated. Therefore, it is necessary to analyze the real time game play [56]. Table 2 summarizes various
proposed methodologies to resolve various challenging tasks in basketball sport with their limitations.

 Table 2. Studies in Basketball

                  Problem             Proposed          Precision and Performance
        Ref.                                                                                     Limitations and Remarks
                 Statement          Methodology                characteristics
               Recognizing                            The metrics used to evaluate the
               action of                              method are Spearman rank-order           The    methodology     failed   to
 L Long 2021
               basketball             Bi-LSTM         correlation coefficient, Kendall          recognize difficult actions due to
 [29]
               player by using    Sequence2Sequence   rank-order correlation coefficient,       which accuracy is reduced.
               image                                  Pearson linear correlation
                recognition                                coefficient, and Root Mean               The accuracy of action recognition
                technique.                                 Squared Error and achieved                can   be      improved            with       deep
                                                           0.921, 0.803, 0.932, and 1.03             convolutional neural network.
                                                           respectively.
                                                                                                    Proposed       methodology            fail     to
                                                                                                     predict the trajectories in case of
                                                           The proposed methodology was              uncertain and complex scenarios.
                Multi-future           Conditional         tested on Average Displacement           As    the       behaviour             of      the
Bertugli A et   trajectory         Variational Recurrent   Error and Final Displacement              basketball/payers are dynamic in
al. 2021 [51]   prediction in        Neural Networks       Error metrics. The methodology is         nature, belief maps cannot steer
                basketball.         (RNN) - TrajNet++      robust if smaller the number and it       future positions.
                                                           has achieved 7.01 and 10.61.             Training the model with a dataset of
                                                                                                     different events can rectify the
                                                                                                     failures of predictions.
                                                           At the point guard (pg) position 4
                Predicting line-
                                                           candidates were taken and at the
                up performance
                                                           center (c) position 3 candidates
                of basketball
Y Wang et                              RNN + NN            were taken. The total score of pg
                player by                                                                                                   -
al. 2021 [56]                                              candidates is 13.67, 12.96, 13.42,
                analyzing the
                                                           10.39, and where the total score of
                situation of the
                                                           c candidates is 10.21, 14.08, and
                field.
                                                           13.48 respectively.

                                                                                                    Tracking in specific areas like
                                    YOLOv3 + Deep-         Faster-RCNN provides better
                                                                                                     severe occlusions and improving
                                          SORT             accuracy than YOLOv3 among
                                                                                                     detection precision improves the
                Multiplayers       Faster-RCNN + Deep-     baseline detectors.
                                                                                                     accuracy and computation speed.
Xubo Fu et      tracking in               SORT             Joint Detection and Embedding
                                                                                                    By    adopting         frame         extracting
al. 2020 [30]   basketball         YOLOv3 + DeepMOT        method performs better in
                                                                                                     methods, in terms of speed and
                videos               Faster-RCNN +         accuracy of tracking and
                                                                                                     accuracy,        it         can        achieve
                                        DeepMOT            computing speed among multi
                                                                                                     comprehensive performance, which
                                           JDE             object tracking methods.
                                                                                                     may be an alternative solution.

                                                                                                    In case of noisy environment,
                                                                                                     significant chance of occlusion,
                                                                                                     unusual       viewing        angle         and/or
                Recognizing                                                                          variability      of         gestures,         the
                                                           Achieved an accuracy of
                the referee                                                                          performance           of    the      proposed
Julius                                                     95.6% for referee signal
                signals from          HOG + SVM                                                      method is not consistent.
Žemgulys et                                                recognition using local binary
                real time videos       LBP + SVM                                                    Detecting with jersey colour and
al. 2020 [38]                                              pattern features and SVM
                in basketball                                                                        eliminating      all       other      detected
                                                           classification.
                game.                                                                                elements in the frame can be the
                                                                                                     other solution to improve the
                                                                                                     accuracy       of          referee         signal
                                                                                                     recognition.
                                                                                                 Proposed model can recognize the
                Event
                                                                                                  global movement in the video.
L Wu et al.     recognition in                                  mAP for group activity
                                           CNN                                                   By         recognizing       the      local
2020 [28]       basketball                                       recognition is 72.1%
                                                                                                  movements the accuracy can be
                videos
                                                                                                  improved.
                                                                                                 Proposed model gives less accuracy
                Analyzing                                 Achieved an accuracy of 76.5%           for the actions like pass and foul.
L Chen et al.
                behaviour of           CNN + RNN          for four type of actions in            Also       gives   less    accuracy     of
2020 [41]
                the player.                               basketball video.                       recognition and prediction on test
                                                                                                  dataset compared to valid dataset.
                                                                                                 YOLO confuses the overlapped
                Tracking ball                             Jersey number recognition in            image for a single player. In the
                movements and        YOLO + Joy2019       terms of Precision achieved is          subsequent frame, the tracking ID of
Y Yoon et
                classification of                         74.3%.                                  the overlapped player is exchanged,
al. 2019 [31]
                players in                                Player recognition in terms of          which        causes       wrong    player
                basketball game                           Recall achieved 89.8%.                  information to be associated with
                                                                                                  the identified box.
                Events                                                                           Performance can be improved by
                                                          Average accuracy using two-stage
L Wu et al.     classifications        CNN + LSTM                                                 introducing information like
                                                          event classification scheme
2019 [27]       in basketball                                                                     individual player pose detection.,
                                                          achieved 60.96%.
                videos                                                                            player location detection etc.
                Classification
                                                                                                 Considered only two defensive
                of different
                                                                                                  strategies     “switch”     and    “trap”
                defensive
                                                                                                  involved in Basketball.
                strategies of
                                                                                                 In addition, the alternative method
                basketball
                                                          Achieved 69% of classification          of labeling large spatio-temporal
C Tian et al.   payers, at          KNN, Decision Trees
                                                          accuracy for automatic defensive        datasets will also lead to better
2019 [47]       particularly             and SVM
                                                          strategy identification.                results.
                when they
                                                                                                 Future research may also consider
                deviate from
                                                                                                  other defensive strategies such as
                their initial
                                                                                                  pick-and-roll and pick-and-pop.
                defensive
                action.
                Basketball                                                                       To improve the accuracy time
                trajectory                                The proposed method performed           series the prediction has to
                prediction                                well in terms of convergence rate       consider.
Yu Z et al.     based on real        BLSTM + MDN          and final AUC (91%), and proved        By considering factors like player
2018 [36]       data and                                  deep learning models perform            cooperation and defense when
                generating new                            better than conventional models         predicting NBA player positions,
                trajectory                                (GLM and GBM).                          the performance of the model can
                samples.                                                                          be improved.

                Generating                                Validated on hierarchical policy       Proposed model failed in trajectory
Zheng et al.                            GRU-CNN
                basketball                                network (HPN) with ground truth         of three-dimensional basketball
2017 [49]
                trajectories.                             and 3 baselines.                        match.
                                                   Automatically analyses the
                  Score detection,                                                        Proposed method is lacks in
                                                   basketball match, detects scoring
                  highlight video                                                          computation speed which achieved
 W Liu et al.                        BEI+CNN       and generates highlights.
                  generation                                                               5 frames per second.
 [2017] [39]                                       Achieved an accuracy, precision,
                  basketball                                                              Therefore it cannot be implemented
                                                   recall, and f1-score of 94.59%,
                  video.                                                                   in a real-time basketball match.
                                                   96.55%, 92.31%, and 94.38%.
                  Multi-person
                                                   Event classification and event
 V.Ramanath       event
                                                   detection achieved in terms of         High resolution dataset can improve
 an et al.        recognition in     BLSTM
                                                   mean average precision i.e. 51.6%       the performance of the model.
 2016 [32]        basketball
                                                   and 43.5%.
                  video.
                                                                                          The methodology fails in many
                                      RNN                                                  factors such as complexity of
                                                                                           interaction,   distinctiveness,    and
                  Player
 K Wang et                                           Achieved an accuracy of 80%           diversity of the target classes and
                  behaviour
 al. 2016 [42]                                         over offensive strategies.          other extrinsic factors like reactions
                  analysis.
                                                                                           to defense, unexpected events such
                                                                                           as   fouls,    and   consistency    of
                                                                                           executions.

                  Prediction of 3-                                                        Proposed method fails in case of
 Rajiv C.S et                         RNN           Evaluated in terms of AUC and
                  point shot in                                                            high ball velocity and noisy nature
 al. 2016 [37]                                             achieved 84.30%.
                  basketball game                                                          of motion data.




4.2 Soccer
             Soccer is played using football and two teams of eleven players each compete to get the ball into
the other team's goal, thereby scoring a goal. The players always confuse each other by changing their speed
or direction unexpectedly. Due to their same jersey color, players look almost identical and are frequently
involved in possessing the ball which leads to severe occlusions and tracking ambiguities. In such case,
jersey number must be detected to recognize player [57]. Accurate tracking [58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65,
66, 67, 291, 292] by detection [68, 69, 70, 71] of multiple soccer players as well as ball in real-time, is a
major challenge to evaluate the performance of the players, to find their relative positions at regular
intervals, and to link spatiotemporal data to extract trajectories. The systems which evaluate the player [72]
or team performance [73] have the potential to reveal aspects of the game that are not obvious to the human
eye. Such systems can successfully evaluate the activities of players [74] such as distance covered by
players, shot detection [75, 76], number of sprints, player's position and their movements [77, 78], player's
relative position concerning other players, possession [79] of the soccer ball and motion/gesture recognition
of referee [80], predicting player trajectories for shot situations [81]. The generated data can evaluate
individual player performance, occlusion handling [19] by detecting position of player [82], action
recognition [83], predicting and classifying the passes [84, 85, 86], key event extraction [87, 88, 89, 90, 91,
92, 93, 94, 95, 96], tactical performance of the team [97, 98, 99, 100, 101], and analyzing the team tactics
based on the team formation [102, 103, 104], generating highlights [105, 106, 107, 108]. Table 3
summarizes various proposed methodologies to resolve various challenging tasks in soccer sport with their
limitations.
 Table 3 Studies in Soccer

               Problem                  Proposed        Precision and Performance
 Ref.                                                                                             Limitations and Remarks
               Statement              Methodology       characteristics
                                                                                                     This methodology effectively handle’s
 B.                                                     Methodology       achieved     tracking
                                      YOLOv3 and                                                      challenging situations, such as partial
 Thulasya      Player and ball                          accuracy of 93.7% on multiple object
                                         SORT                                                         occlusions,     players,       and         ball,
 Naik et al.   detection and                            tracking accuracy metrics with a
                                                                                                      reappearing after a few frames but fails
 2022          tracking in soccer.                      detection speed of 23.7 FPS and a
                                                                                                      when the players were severely
 [291]                                                  tracking speed of 11.3 FPS.
                                                                                                      occluded.
 B.            Player, referee and
                                                        Model achieved a tracking accuracy           The limitation of this method is that
 Thulasya      ball detection and     DeepPlayer-
                                                        of 96% and 60% on MOTA and                    when the player with the same jersey
 Naik et al.   tracking by jersey         Track
                                                        GMOTA metrics respectively with a             color is occluded, the ID of the player
 2022          color recognition
                                                        detection speed of 23 FPS.                    is switched.
 [292]         in soccer.
               Tracking soccer          Machine                                                      The method failed to track the ball at
 G Paul et     players to evaluate    Learning and      Performance     of    player   tracking       critical moments such as pass at
 al. 2021      the number of              Deep          model measured in terms of mAP and            beginning and shot.
 [72]          goals scored by a     Reinforcement      achieved 74.6%.                              It also failed to overcome the identity
               player.                  Learning.                                                     switching problem.
               Extracting ball                                                                       Concatenation of auto-encoder and
 H Cho et                                               Methodology evaluated in terms of
               events to classify     Convolutional                                                   extreme learning machine techniques
 al. 2021                                               accuracy and achieved 76.5% for 20
               the player passing     Auto-Encoder                                                    will improve the events classification
 [89]                                                   players.
               style.                                                                                 performance.
                                       Variational      Achieved F1-score of 95.2% event             Deep      extreme      learning     machine
 K Ali et
               Detecting events in    Auto-encoder      images and Recall of 51.2% on                 technique      which       employs     auto-
 al. 2021
               soccer sport.         and EfficientNet   images not related to soccer at               encoder technique may enhance the
 [96]
                                                        threshold value of 0.50.                      event detection accuracy.

 Anthony
               Action spotting
 et al. 2020                           YOLO-like        Algorithm achieved mAP of 62.5%.                                     -
               soccer video.
 [77]                                    encoder

                                                                                                     The    proposed        model      failed     in
                                                        Prediction    models      achieved   an       identifying the players that are more
 S                                                      overall    accuracy    of    75:2%   in       frequently involved in match states
 Kusmakar      Team performance           SVM           predicting the correct segmental              that end with an attempt at scoring i.e.,
 et al. 2020   analysis in soccer                       outcome of the likelihood of team             a ‘‘SHOT ’’ at goal which may assist
 [73]                                                   making a successful attempt to score          sports analysts and team staff to
                                                        a goal on used dataset.                       develop     strategies     suited    to      an
                                                                                                      opponent’s playing style.
                                       AlexNet,                                                   Though the proposed algorithm is
              Motion
Y Kim et                               VGGNet-16,       The proposed algorithm achieved            immune to variations of illuminance
              Recognition of
al. 2020                               ResNet-18, and   97.56% accuracy with real-time             caused by weather conditions, it failed
              assistant referees in
[80]                                   DenseNet-121     operations.                                in the case of occlusions between
              soccer
                                                                                                   referee and players.
              Predicting the
A Hassan
              attributes (Loss or            ANN        The proposed model predicts 83.3%
et al. 2020                                                                                                         -
              Win) in soccer                            for the win case and 72.7% for loss.
[101]
              sport.
                                                                                                  Team tactics are estimated on the basis
                                                        Performance of the model are               of the relationship between tactics of
S Genki       Team tactics
                                       DELM             measured on precision, recall, and         two teams and ball possession.
et al. 2019   estimation in
                                                        f1-score and achieved 87.6%, 88%,         The method fails to estimate the team
[97]          soccer videos.
                                                        and 87.8%.                                 formation at the beginning of the
                                                                                                   game.
                                       CNN based
                                       Gaussian
Y Ganesh                                                                                          By classifying the actions into
              Action recognition       Weighted event   Accuracy in terms of F1 Score is
et al. 2019                                                                                        subtypes, accuracy of action
              in soccer                based Action     achieved 52.8% for 6 classes.
[83]                                                                                               recognition can be enhanced.
                                       Classifier
                                       architecture
                                                                                                  It could not detect when the ball
P.R
              Detection and                                                                        moved out of play in the field, in the
Kamble et
              tracking of ball in      VGG – M CNN       Achieved an accuracy of 87.45%.           stands region, or from partial
al. 2019
              soccer videos.                                                                       occlusion by players, or with ball
[59]
                                                                                                   color matching the player jersey.
              Automatic event                            U-encoder is designed for feature
K Zhang       extraction for                                  extraction and has better           To carry out tactical analysis of the
et al. 2019   soccer videos                 YOLO         performance in terms of accuracy          team, player trajectory needs to be
[90]          based on multi-                               compared with fixed feature            analyzed.
              cameras.                                                extractor.
                                                                                                  By extracting the features with the
Jackman                                                   MobileNetV2 method performed             MobileNetV2 and then using 3D
              Shot detection in
et al. 2019                             MobileNetV2      better than other feature extractor       convolution on the extracted features
              football game
[75]                                                                  methods.                     for each frame can improve the
                                                                                                   detection performance.
                                                                                                  The model failed to predict the player
Lindstrom     Predicting      player
                                            LSTM        Performance is measured in terms of        trajectory in the case of players
et al. 2019   trajectories for shot
                                                            f1-score and achieved 53%.             confused each other by changing their
[81]          situations
                                                                                                   speed or direction unexpectedly.
              Analyzing the team                                                                  The model is limited to scalability as it
Y Wu et       formation in soccer                                                                  cannot be operated on high resolution
                                                           The formation detection model
al. 2018      and       formulating                                                                soccer videos.
                                                        achieved a max accuracy of 96.8%.
[103]         several         design                                                              The results are bounded to a particular
              goals.                                                                               match, and it cannot evaluate the
                                       OpenCV is used                                              tactical    schemes           across     different
                                        for back-end                                               games.
                                        visualization.                                            Visualization        of       real-time     team
                                                                                                   formation is another drawback as it
                                                                                                   limits the visualization of non-trivial
                                                                                                   spatial information.
                                                                                                  By applying state-of-the-art tracking
                                                                                                   algorithms, one can predominantly
                                                                                                   improve the performance of tactics
                                                                                                   analysis.

                                                                                                  The proposed model failed to handle
                                                                                                   the players that are not visible for
Gerke et      Player recognition           Spatial       Achieved an accuracy of 82% by
                                                                                                   certain periods.
al. 2017      with jersey number       Constellation +   combining Spatial Constellation +
                                                                                                  Predicting the position of invisible
[57]          recognition.                  CNN          CNN models.
                                                                                                   players could improve the quality of
                                                                                                   spatial constellation features.

                                                                                                  To determine the quality of each pass,
                                                                                                   some factors like pass execution of
                                                                                                   player at particular difficult situation,
              Evaluating        and
S Chawla                                    SVM            The proposed model achieves an          strategic value of pass, the riskiness of
              classifying       the
et al.2017                                               accuracy of 90.2% during a football       the pass etc. need to be included.
              passes in football
[84]                                                                    match.                    To rate the passes in sequence, it is
              game.
                                                                                                   needed to consider the sequence of
                                                                                                   passes      during        which        player   is
                                                                                                   possessing the ball.


              Detecting the ball
H                                                                                                 The proposed model is not robust and
              and         predicting     Static RNN
Tepanyan                                                  Achieved test accuracy of 85.5%.         it does not detect the ball as it is small
              which team possess
2017 [79]                                                                                          in size in far view frames.
              the ball.


                                                         The performance of the methodology
S Genki       Team           tactics                                                              The model fails when audiovisual
                                                          is measured in terms of precision,
et al. 2016   estimation          in        SVM                                                    features could not recognize quick
                                                          recall, and f1-score and achieved
[98]          soccer videos.                                                                       changes in the team tactics.
                                                                98%, 97%, and 98%.


              Analyzing        pass                         To extract the features of pass       By          incorporating               temporal
J brookes                                  k-NN,
              events in the case                            location, they used heat map           information,         the          classification
et al. 2016                                 SVM
              of      non-obvious                        generation and achieved an accuracy       accuracy can be improved and it is also
[88]
              insights in soccer.                           of 87% in classification task.         offers specific insights to situations.

                                                           Player detection is evaluated in
Baysal et     Tracking          the                        terms of accuracy and achieved
al. 2015      players in soccer         HOG + SVM                      97.7%.                                                -
[58]          videos.                                    Classification accuracy using k-NN
                                                            achieved 93% for 15 classes.
 Moez B et     Action                                     The model achieves a classification             By extracting the features of various
 al. 2010      classification       in   LSTM + RNN           rate of 92% on four types of                 activities,     the     accuracy    of   the
 [74]          soccer videos                                           activities.                         classification rate can be improved.




4.3 Cricket
            In many aspects of cricket as well, computer vision techniques can effectively replace manual
analysis. A cricket match has many observable elements including batting shots [109, 110, 111, 112, 113,
114, 115, 116], bowling performance [117, 118, 119, 120, 121, 122], number of runs or score depending
on ball movement, detecting and estimating the trajectory of the ball [123], decision making on placement
of players foot [128], outcome classification to generate commentary [124, 125], detecting umpire decision
[126, 127]. Predicting an individual crickter’s performance [129, 130] based upon his past record can be
critical in the selection of team members in international competitions. This process is highly subjective
and usually requires much expertise and negotiate decision making. By predicting the results of cricket
matches [131, 132, 133, 134, 135] such as toss decision, home ground, player’s fitness, player’s
performance criteria [136], and other dynamic strategies the winner can be estimated. The video
summarization process provides a compact version of the original video to manage the interesting video
contents easily. Also, the video summarization methods capture the viewer’s interest by selecting exciting
events from the original video [137, 138]. Table 4 summarizes various proposed methodologies with their
limitations to resolve various application issues in cricket sport.
 Table 4 Studies in Cricket

                        Problem                Proposed            Precision and Performance
 Ref.                                                                                                          Limitations and Remarks
                        Statement            Methodology           characteristics
                                                                     It evaluated in terms of precision,                By incorporating unorthodox
                        Shot
                                              CNN – Gated            recall, and f1-score and achieved                   shots which are played in t20
 2021 [112]             classification
                                             Recurrent Unit          93.40%, 93.10%, and 93% for 10                      in dataset may improve the
                        in cricket.
                                                                               types of shots.                           testing accuracy.
                                                                     It evaluated in terms of precision,
                        Detecting the                                                                                   Training the model with the
                                             VGG16 - CNN            recall, and f1-score and maximum
 R Rahman et al.        action of the                                                                                    dataset of wrong actions can
                                                                   average accuracy achieved is 98.6%
 2021 [120]             bowler in                                                                                        improve         the   detection
                                                                    for 13 classes. (13 types of bowling
                        cricket.                                                                                         accuracy.
                                                                                     actions)
                        Movement
                                                                    Model evaluated in terms of mean
                        detection of          Deep-LSTM
 2021 [128]                                                        square error and achieved minimum                                 -
                        the batsman in
                                                                               error of 1.107.
                        cricket.
                                                                                                            Decision        tree     classifier
                                                                                                             performance is low due to the
                                          Gated Recurrent       The methodology evaluated in terms           existence of a huge number of
                                         Neural Network +       of precision, f1-score, accuracy and         trees.     Therefore,   a     small
                                       Hybrid Rotation Forest      achieved 96.82%, 94.83% and               change in decision tree may
                    Cricket video      -Deep Belief Networks           96.32% for four classes.              improve        the      prediction
2021 [137, 138]
                    summarization.            YOLO                 Yolo is evaluated on precision,           accuracy.
                                                                  recall, and f1-score and achieved         Extreme Learning Machines
                                                                   97.1%, 94.4%, and 95.7% for 8             has faced the problem of over
                                                                                classes.                     fitting,     which      can     be
                                                                                                             overcome        by      removing
                                                                                                             duplicate data in dataset.
                                                                                                            Replacing machine learning
                    Prediction of
                                         Efficient Machine          Proposed algorithm achieves              techniques with deep learning
                    individual
ChetanKapadiyaet                       Learning Techniques       classification accuracy of 93.73%           techniques may improve the
                    player
al. 2020 [129]                                                      which is good compared with              performance       in    prediction
                    performance in
                                                                traditional classification algorithms.       even in the case of different
                    cricket
                                                                                                             environmental conditions.
                    Classification                                                                          To improve the accuracy of
Md. Ferdouse                                                    Average classification in terms of
                    of different               CNN                                                           classification, deep learning
Ahmed Foysal1 et                                                precession is 0.80, Recall is 0.79 and
                    batting shots in                                                                         algorithm has to be replaced
al. 2019 [109]                                                  F1-score is 0.79.
                    cricket.                                                                                 with a better neural network.
                                                                                                            Due to the unavailability of
                    Outcome                                                                                  standard dataset for ball by
                    classification         CNN + LSTM                                                        ball outcome classification in
                                                                Maximum of 85% of training
RohitKumaret al.    task to create                                                                           cricket, the accuracy is not up
                                                                accuracy and 74% validation
2019 [124]          automatic                                                                                to mark. Also better accuracy
                                                                accuracy
                    commentary                                                                               leads to automatic
                    generation.                                                                              commentary generation in
                                                                                                             sports.
                    Detecting third
                                                                It holds 94% accuracy in Deep               To build automated umpiring
                    umpire
                                                                Conventional Neural Network                  system based on computer
                    decision and       CNN + Inception V3
Md. Kowsheret                                                   (DCNN) and 100% in Inception V3              vision application and
                    Automated
al. 2019 [126]                                                  for the classification of umpire             artificial intelligence, the
                    scoring system
                                                                signal in order to automate scoring          results obtained in this paper
                    in cricket
                                                                system of cricket.                           are more enough.
                    game.
                    Classification                                                                          The model lacks data for
                    of cricket                                                                               detecting spin bowlers. As the
                                                                The test set accuracy of the model is
MdNafeeAl Islam     bowlers based              CNN                                                           dataset is confined to left arm
                                                                93.3% which demonstrates its
et al. 2019 [117]   on their                                                                                 bowlers, the model
                                                                classification ability.
                    bowling                                                                                  misclassifies the right arm
                    actions.                                                                                 bowlers.
Muhammad                                                                                                    As the model is dependent on
                    Recognition of                              The proposed models are able to
Zeeshan Khan et                                                                                              frame per second of the
                    various batting                             recognize
al. 2018 [110]                              Deep - CNN                                                       video, it fails to recognize
                     shots in cricket                           a shot being played with 90%                 when the frame per second
                     game                                       accuracy.                                    increases.
                     Automatic
                     highlight                                                                              The proposed method cannot
 PushkarShukla et
                     generation in          CNN + SVM           Mean Average Precision of 72.31%             clear metrics to evaluate the
 al. 2018 [125]
                     the game of                                                                             false positives in highlights.
                     cricket.
                     Umpire poses                                                                           Classification and
 Aravind Ravi et     detection and              SVM             VGG19-Fc2 Player testing accuracy            summarization technique can
 al. 2018 [127]      classification                             = 78.21%                                     minimize false positives and
                     in cricket.                                                                             false negatives.
                                                                                                            In order to assess the player’s
                                                                                                             batting caliber, certain
                     Activity
                                          Decision Trees, k-    The proposed method identifies 20            aspects of batting also need to
                     recognition for
 AFTAB KHAN                              Nearest Neighbours,    classes of batting shots with an             be considered i.e. position of
                     quality
 et al. 2017 [111]                       and Support Vector     average F1-score of 88% based on             batsman before playing shot
                     assessment of
                                             Machines.          recorded movement of data.                   and way of batting shots for a
                     batting shots.
                                                                                                             particular bowling types can
                                                                                                             be modeled.
                                               k-NN,                                                        Imbalance in the dataset is one
                                        Naïve Bayesian, SVM,                                                 of the causes to get less
                     Predicting the      and Random Forest                                                   accuracy.
                                                                Achieved an accuracy of 71% upon
 2016 [131] [132]    outcome of the                                                                         Deep learning methodologies
                                                                    the statistics of 366 matches.
                     cricket match.                                                                          may give promising results by
                                                                                                             training with a dataset that
                                                                                                             included added features.
                                                                 Variation in ball speed has a feeble
                                         Multiple regression       significance in influencing the
                                                mode            bowling performance (p-value being
                     Performance
 D. Bhattacharjee                                                              0.069).
                     analysis of the                                                                                        -
 et a. 2012 [119]                                               The variance ratio of the regression
                     bowler.
                                                                 equation to that of the residuals (F-
                                                                    value) is given by 3.394 with
                                                                    corresponding p-value 0.015.
                     Predicting         Multilayer perception    The model achieves an accuracy of
 R.I.Subramanian
                     performance of        Neural Network         77% on batting performance and                            -
 et al. 2009 [130]
                     the player.                                   63% on bowling performance.




4.4 Tennis
          Tennis is one of the most popular sports across the globe. A meticulous analysis of the game is
needed to reduce human errors and extract several statistics from the visual feed of the game. Automated
ball and player tracking is one such class of systems which requires sophisticated algorithms for analysis.
The primary data for tennis is obtained from the ball and player tracking systems, such as HawkEye[139,
140] and TennisSense [26, 141]. The data from this systems can be used to detect and track the ball/player
[142, 143, 144, 145], visualizing the overall tennis match [146, 147] and predicting trajectories of ball
landing positions [148, 149, 150], player activity recognition [151, 152, 153], analyzing the movements of
the player and ball [154], analyzing the player behaviour [155] and predicting the next shot movement
[156], real time tennis swing classification [157]. Table 5 summarizes various proposed methodologies to
resolve various challenging tasks in tennis sport with their limitations.
 Table 5 Studies in Tennis

                     Problem                 Proposed           Precision and Performance
 Ref.                                                                                                    Limitations and Remarks
                     Statement             Methodology          characteristics
                     Monitoring
                                                                                                            Using lightweight backbone
 G Wu et al. 2021    and Analyzing           YOLOv3             Model achieved mAP of 90% with
                                                                                                             for detection module can
 [140]               tactics of                                 13 FPS on high resolution images.
                                                                                                             improve the processing speed.
                     tennis player.
                                       Temporal Deep Belief                                                 If two different movements
                     Player action
 N Bai et al. 2021                           Network            Accuracy of recognition rate is              are similar then the model is
                     recognition in
 [153]                                     (Unsupervised        94.72%                                       failed to recognize the actual
                     tennis sport.
                                         Learning Model)                                                     action.
                                                                Maximum classification accuracy of
                                                                                                            If the play styles of the
                                       SVM, Neural Network      99.72% achieved using NN with a
                                                                                                             players are different but the
 M Kevin et al.      Tennis swing      (NN), K-NN, Random       Recall of 1.
                                                                                                             patterns are the same, in that
 2021 [157]          classification.   Forest, Decision Tree    Second highest classification
                                                                                                             case models failed to classify
                                                                accuracy of 99.44% was achieved
                                                                                                             the actual swing direction.
                                                                using K-NN with a Recall of 0.98.
                                                                                                            The model lacks real-time
                                                                The average accuracy of player
                                                                                                             learning ability and requires
                     Player activity                            activity recognition based on the
 J Cai et al. 2020                            LSTM                                                           much computing time at the
                     recognition in                             historical LSTM model was 0.95,
 [151]                                                                                                       training stage.
                     tennis game.                               and that of the typical LSTM model
                                                                                                            The model is also lacks in
                                                                was 0.70.
                                                                                                             online learning ability.
                     Automatic
                     detection and                                                                          In case of non-linear
                                                                Among all the proposed methods,
                     classification       Random Forest                                                      regression analysis,
                                                                model 1 had the highest F1-score of
 B Giles et al.      of change of            Algorithm                                                       classification performance of
                                                                0.801, as well as the smallest rate of
 2019 [142]          direction from                                                                          the proposed model is not up
                                                                false negative classification (3.4%)
                     player tracking                                                                         to mark.
                                                                and average accuracy of 80.2%
                     data in tennis
                     game.
                     Prediction of
                                                                Performance factor is measured              Performance of the model
                     shot location     Generative Adversarial
 T Fernando et al.                                              based on minimum distance                    deviates for the different
                     and type of          Network (GAN)
 2019 [148]                                                     recorded between predicted and               player styles as it trained on
                     shot in tennis      (Semi-Supervised
                                                                ground truth shot location.                  limited player dataset.
                     game.                    Model)
                     Analyzing          For data extraction,
                     individual           player and ball
                     tennis match      tracking system such                                                 Performance of the model
                                                                Generation of 1-D space charts for
 Tom Polk et al.     by capturing       as HawkEye is used.                                                  deviates for different matches
                                                                  patterns and point outcomes to
 2019 [154]          spatio temporal                                                                         as it was trained only on
                                                                    analyze the player activity.
                     data player and                                                                         limited tennis matches.
                     ball
                     movements.
                                                               The classification accuracies as
                                                               follows:
                                                                   I.     Improves from 84.10% to
                                                                                                            The detection accuracy can be
                                                                          88.16% for players of
                                                                                                             increased by incorporating
                     Action              3 Layered LSTM                   mixed abilities.
 S.V Mora et al.                                                                                             spatio-temporal data and
                     recognition in                               II.     Improves from 81.23% to
 2017 [152]                                                                                                  combining the action
                     tennis                                               84.33% for amateurs and
                                                                                                             recognition data with
                                                                          from 87.82% to 89.42%
                                                                                                             statistical data.
                                                                          for professionals.
                                                               When trained using the entire
                                                               dataset.
                                        For data extraction,
                                                                                                            As the model is trained on
                     Shot prediction      player and ball      By combining factors (Outside, Left
                                                                                                             limited data (only elite
                     and player        tracking system such    Top, Right Top, Right Bottom)
 Xinyu Wei et al.                                                                                            players), it cannot be
                     behavior           as HawkEye is used     together, speed, start location, player
 2016 [156]                                                                                                  performed on ordinary
                     analysis in       and Dynamic Bayesian    movement achieved better results of
                                                                                                             players across multiple
                     tennis              Network for shot      74% AUC.
                                                                                                             tournaments.
                                            prediction.
                                                               Evaluation results in terms of               The proposed method cannot
                                                               precision, recall, F1-score are of            handle multi object tracking
 Xiangzeng Zhou      Ball tracking      Two-Layered Data       84.39%, 75.81%, 79.87% for                    and furthermore it is possible
 et al. 2015 [143]   in tennis              Association        Australian open tennis match and              to integrate audio information
                                                               82.34%, 67.01%, 73.89% for U.S                to facilitate making a high
                                                               open tennis match.                            level analysis of game.
                     Highlight
                                                                                                            The proposed algorithm fails
                     extraction from
                                                                                                             to recognize player, as the
                     rocket sports                             The proposed algorithm achieved an
 Guangyu Zhu et                                                                                              player is a deformable object
                     videos based              SVM             accuracy of 90.7% for tennis videos
 al. 2007 [155]                                                                                              of which the limbs make free
                     on human                                  and 87.6% for badminton videos.
                                                                                                             movement during action
                     behavior
                                                                                                             recognition.
                     analysis.




4.5 Volleyball
          Volleyball is a team sport in which two teams of six players are separated by a net. Each team tries
to score points by grounding a ball on the other team's court under organized rules. So, detecting and
analyzing the player activities [158, 159, 160], detecting play patterns and classifying tactical behavior’s
[161, 162, 163, 164], predicting league standings [165], detecting and classifying spiking skills [166, 167],
estimating the pose of the player [168], tracking player [169], tracking the ball [170] etc., are the major
aspects of volleyball sport. Predicting the ball trajectory [171] in volleyball game by observing the motion
of setter player. Table 6 summarizes various proposed methodologies to resolve various challenging tasks
in volleyball sport with their limitations.

 Table 6 Studies in Volleyball

                     Problem                      Proposed              Precision and Performance
 Ref.                                                                                                            Limitations and Remarks
                     Statement                  Methodology             characteristics
                                                                                                                    Model fails to track the
                                                                                                                     players if video is taken from
                     Group activity
                                                                                                                     dynamic camera.
 T Haritha et al.    recognition by                                        Model achieved an accuracy of
                                              CNN + Bi-LSTM                                                         Temporal action localization
 2021 [168]          tracking                                                            93.9%.
                                                                                                                     can improve the accuracy of
                     players.
                                                                                                                     tracking the players in severe
                                                                                                                     occlusion condition.
                     Recognizing
 Z Kai et al. 2021   and classifying                SVM                  Achieved recognition rate of 98%
                                                                                                                                    -
 [169]               player’s                                                  for correct samples 349.
                     behaviour.
                                                                                                                    By employing state-of-the-art
                     Classification                                          The model achieves better               method and training on
 Sebastian           of tactical                                         classification results as prediction        proper dataset which has
 Wenninger,et al.    behaviors in               RNN + GRU               accuracies ranges from 37% for the           continuous positional data, it
 2020 [162]          beach                                               forecasting the attack and direction        is possible predict tactic
                     volleyball.                                        to 60% of the prediction of success.         behavior and set/match
                                                                                                                     outcomes.
                     Motion
                                                                                                                    Replacing with deep learning
                     estimation the         Machine Vision and
 Y Tian 2020 [170]                                                      Tracking accuracy is 89%                     algorithms gives better
                     sport           of    Classical particle filter.
                                                                                                                     results.
                     volleyball
                     Assessing the
                     use of Inertial
                     Measurement            KNN, Naïve Bayes,                                                       By incorporating different
 Fasih Haider1 et    Units      in   the            SVM                 Unweighted       Average   Recall   of       frequency domain features,
 al. 2019 [163]      recognition of                                     86.87%                                       the performance factor can be
                     different                                                                                       improved.
                     volleyball
                     actions.
                     .Predicting the
                                                                        The proposed method predicts 0.3 s          In case of predicting the 3D
                     ball trajectory
 ShuyaSuda et al.                                                       in advance of the trajectory of the          body position data, it records
                     in volleyball
 2019 [171]                                                             volleyball based on the motion of            a large error. This can be
                     game by                  Neural Network
                                                                        setter player.                               overcome by training a
                     observing the
                      motion of                                                                             properly annotated large data
                      setter player.                                                                        on state-of-art-methods.



                      Activity                                                                             Instead of using wearable
                                                              The approach achieved classification
                      recognition in                                                                        devices, the computer vision
 Thomas Kautz et                                              accuracy of 83.2%, which is superior
                      beach-             Deep Convolutional                                                 architectures can be used to
 al. 2017 [159]                                               compared with other classification
                      volleyball               LSTM                                                         classify the activities of the
                                                              algorithms.
                      game                                                                                  players in volleyball.

                      Volleyball                              Evaluated in terms of Average
 J Wei et al. 2021                             ANN
                      skills and                              Relative Error for 10 samples and                             -
 [165]
                      tactics analysis                        achieved 0.69%.

                                                                                                           The performance of
                      Group activity
 Mostafa S.                                                   Group    activity      recognition   of       architecture is poor because
                      recognition in
 Ibrahim et al.2016                            LSTM           accuracy of the proposed model in             of lack of hierarchical
                      volleyball
 [160]                                                        volleyball is 51.1%.                          considerations of individual
                      game
                                                                                                            and group activity dataset.




4.6 Hockey/Ice-hockey
          Field hockey, also called hockey, is an outdoor game played by two opposing teams of 11 players
each who use sticks curved at the striking end to hit a small, hard ball into their opponent's goal. It is called
field hockey to distinguish it from the similar game played on ice. So, detecting [172] and tracking
player/hockey ball, recognizing the actions of player [173, 174, 175], estimating the pose of the player
[176], classifying and tracking the players of the same team or of different teams [177], referee gesture
analysis [178, 179], hockey ball trajectory estimation etc. are the major aspects of hockey sport.
          Whereas ice hockey is the game between two teams, each usually having six players, who wear
skates and compete on an ice rink. The object is to propel a vulcanized rubber disk, the puck, past a goal
line and into a net guarded by a goaltender. With its speed and its frequent physical contact, ice hockey has
become one of the most popular of international sports. So, detecting/tracking the player [180, 181, 182],
estimating the pose of the player [183], classifying and tracking with different identification the players of
the same team or of different teams, tracking the ice hockey puck [184], classification of puck possession
events [185] etc., are the major aspects of the ice-hockey sport. Table 7 summarizes various proposed
methodologies to resolve various challenging tasks in hockey/ice-hockey sport with their limitations.

 Table 7 Studies in Hockey

                         Problem                Proposed        Precision and Performance
 Ref.                                                                                                   Limitations and Remarks
                         Statement            Methodology       characteristics
                                        SVM, Faster R-CNN    HD+SVM achieved best results in
                       Detecting the                                                                      Model is failed to detect the
Ş Melike et al. 2021                    SSD and YOLO         terms of accuracy, recall and f1-
                       player in                                                                           players in occlusion
[172]                                                        score of 77.24%, 69.23%, and
                       hockey.                                                                             conditions.
                                                             73.02%.
                       Localizing                                                                         By replacing the detection
V Kanav et al. 2021    puck Position       Faster RCNN       Evaluated in terms of AUC and                 method with YOLO series
[184]                  and Event                             achieved 73.1%.                               can improve the
                       recognition.                                                                        performance.
                                                                                                          Some of the jersey number
                                                                                                           classes such as 1 to 4 are
                       Identification     ResNet + LSTM      Achieves      player    identification        incorrectly predicted. The
Alvin Chan et al.
                       of player in                          accuracy of over 87% on split                 diagonal numbers from 1 to
2020 [177]
                       hockey.                               dataset.                                      100 are falsely classified due
                                                                                                           to the small amount of
                                                                                                           training examples.
                                                                                                          As the proposed model is
                                                                                                           focusses on the spatial
                                                                                                           features, it does not
                                                             The proposed model recognizes the             recognize activities like free
                       Activity                              activities like free hit, goal, penalty       hit and long corner as they
KeerthanaRangasamy
                       recognition in         LSTM           corner, long corner with an                   appear as similar patterns.
et al. 2020 [173]
                       hockey game.                          accuracy of 98%.                             By including temporal
                                                             .                                             features and incorporating
                                                                                                           LSTM to the model, the
                                                                                                           model is robust to
                                                                                                           performance accuracy.
                                                                                                          The architecture is not
                       Pose
                                                                                                           robust to abrupt changes in
                       estimation and
                                                             A novel approach is designed and              video, i.e. it fails to predict
Zixi Cai et al. 2019   temporal based
                                        VGG19 +LiteFlowNet   achieved an accuracy of 85% for               hockey stick.
[176]                  action
                                              + CNN          action recognition.                          Activities like goal scored,
                       recognition in
                                                                                                           or puck location are not
                       hockey sport.
                                                                                                           recognized.
                                                                                                          As the number of hidden
                                                             Performance of the model is better
                       Action                                                                              units to LSTM increases, the
                                                             in similar classes like passing and
                       recognition in                                                                      number of parameters also
KanavVat set al.                                             shooting. It achieved 90% of
                       ice hockey          CNN +LSTM                                                       increases which leads to
2019 [183]                                                   parameter reduction and
                       using player                                                                        overfitting, and low test
                                                             80% of floating point reduction on
                       pose sequence.                                                                      accuracy.
                                                             HARPET dataset.

                       Human
                                                             F1-score of 67% is calculated for            Performance of the model is
Konstantin S et al.    activity
                                                             action recognition on multi-labeled           poor because of improper
2018 [174]             recognition in      CNN +LSTM
                                                             imbalanced dataset.                           imbalanced dataset
                       hockey sport.
                                                                                                      Pose estimation problems
                                                                                                       due to severe occlusions
                      Player action                        Accuracy of the actions recognized
                                                                                                       while motions blur due to
 MehrnazFani et al.   recognition in                       in hockey game is 65% and when
                                             CNN                                                       speed of the game and also
 2017 [175]           ice hockey                               similar actions are merged
                                                                                                       due to lack of proper dataset
                      game                                       accuracy rises to 78%.
                                                                                                       to train models, causing low
                                                                                                       accuracy.




4.7 Badminton
          Badminton is one of the most popular racket sports which includes tactics, techniques, and precise
execution movements. To improve the performance of the player, technologies play a key role in optimizing
training of players which determines the movements of the player [186] during training and game situations
such as action recognition [187, 188, 189], analyzing performance of player [190], detecting and tracking
shuttlecock [191, 192, 193] etc. Table 8 summarizes various proposed methodologies to resolve various
challenging tasks in badminton sport with their limitations.
 Table 8 Studies in in Badminton

                      Problem              Proposed        Precision and Performance
 Ref.                                                                                              Limitations and Remarks
                      Statement           Methodology      characteristics
                                                                                                      Proposed method fails to
                                                                                                       detect in different
                      Shuttlecock
                                        Tiny YOLOv2 and    Results show that comparing with            environmental conditions.
                      detection
 Z Cao et al. 2020                         YOLOv3          state-of-art     methods,    proposed      As it uses the binocular
                      problem of a
 [191]                                                     networks achieved good accuracy             camera to detect 2D
                      badminton
                                                           with efficient computation.                 shuttlecock, it cannot detect
                      robot.
                                                                                                       the 3D shuttlecock
                                                                                                       trajectory.
                      Automated                                                                       The architecture can be
                                                           Recognition of badminton actions
                      badminton          AlexNet+CNN,                                                  improved fine tuning end-to-
                                                           by the linear SVM classifier for
 N A Rahmad et al.    player action    GoogleNet+CNN and                                               end manner with a larger
                                                           both AlexNet and GoogleNet using
 2020 [187]           recognition in         SVM                                                       dataset on feature extracted
                                                           local and global extractor method
                      badminton                                                                        at different fully connected
                                                           is 82% and 85.7%.
                      game.                                                                            layers.
                                                           Nine different activities have been
                                                           distinguished:     seven    badminton
                                                           strokes, displacement and moments
                      Badminton              CNN           of rest. With accelerometer data,          Computer vision techniques
 Teem steels et al.
                      activity                             accurate estimation has been made           can be employed instead of
 2020 [188]
                      recognition                          using CNN with 86% precision.               sensors.
                                                           Accuracy raised to 99% when
                                                           gyroscope data is combined with
                                                           accelerometer data.
                       Classification
                                                                                                              The proposed method
                       of      badminton                           Significantly, GoogleNet model has
                                                                                                              classifies the actions of hit
                       matches images       AlexNet, GoogleNet,    the highest accuracy compared to
 N A Rahamad et al.                                                                                           and non-hit and it can be
                       to recognize the       Vgg-19 + CNN         other models in which only two hit
 2019 [189]                                                                                                   improved by classifying
                       different                                   actions were falsely classified as
                                                                                                              more actions in various
                       actions done by                             non-hit action.
                                                                                                              sports.
                       the athletes.
                                                                   The performance of the proposed
                       Tracking                                                                              The accuracy of tracking
                                            AdaBoost Algorithm     algorithm was evaluated based on
 W Chen et al. 2019    shuttlecock in                                                                         shuttlecock is enhanced by
                                            which can be trained   precision and it achieved an average
 [192]                 badminton                                                                              replacing state-of-the-art AI
                                              using OpenCV         precision accuracy of 94.52% with
                       sport                                                                                  algorithms.
                                                  Library.         10.65 fps.
                                                                                                             The unique properties of
                                                                                                              application such as the
                       Tactical                                    The average accuracy of player
                                                   KNN                                                        length of frequent
 Kokum W et al. 2017   movement                                    position detection is 96.03% and
                                                                                                              trajectories or the
 [186]                 classification in                           97.09% on two halves of a
                                                                                                              dimensions of the vector
                       badminton                                   badminton court.
                                                                                                              space may improve
                                                                                                              classification performance.




4.8 Miscellaneous
         Player detection and tracking is the major requirement in athletic sports like running, swimming
[194, 195], and cycling. In sports like table tennis [196], squash [197, 198], golf [199] etc. ball detection
and tracking, player pose detection [200] are the challenging tasks. In ball-centric sports like rugby,
American football, handball, baseball etc. ball/player detection [201–208] and tracking [209-219],
analyzing the action of player [220-226], events detection and classification [227-231], performance
analysis of player [232-234], referee identification and gesture recognition, etc. are the major challenging
tasks. Video highlight generation is a subclass of video summarization [235-238] which may be viewed as
a subclass of sports video analysis. Table 9 summarizes various proposed methodologies to resolve various
challenging tasks in various sports with their limitations.

 Table 9 Studies in various sports

                       Problem                   Proposed          Precision and Performance
 Ref.                                                                                                     Limitations and Remarks
                       Statement               Methodology         characteristics
                                                                                                             Lightweight         networks    of
                       Beach       sports                                                                     deep learning algorithms can
                       image                       CNN             The model achieved recognition             improve       the     recognition
 Liu Wei 2021 [208]
                       recognition and                             accuracy of 91%.                           accuracy and can also be
                       classification.                                                                        implemented in real-time
                                                                                                              scenario.
                                                                                                                Using advanced optimization
                       Motion image               GDA + SVM          The performance of Symmetric                techniques such as Cosine
                       segmentation in                               Difference Algorithm is measured            Annealing Scheduler with
Y Cao 2020 [195]
                       the      sport     of                         in terms of recall and it achieved          deep      learning     algorithms
                       swimming                                      76.2%.                                      may           improve           the
                                                                                                                 performance.
                       Identifying and
                                                                     Performs various ML algorithms             A standard dataset can
                       recognizing                   k-NN,
Hegazy H et al. 2020                                                 and achieves an accuracy of                 improve the accuracy of
                       wrong strokes                 SVM,
[196]                                                                69.93% using Naïve Bayes                    recognizing the wrong
                       in table tennis             Naïve Bayes
                                                                     algorithm.                                  strokes in table tennis.
                       sport.
                                                                                                                When        compared           with
                                                                                                                 existing                 methods,
                                                                     The proposed Deep Player
                                                                                                                 computation cost is higher
                                                                     Identification method studies the
                                                                                                                 and can be considered a
                                                                     patterns of jersey number, team
                                                                                                                 major      drawback       of    the
                                                                     class, and pose-guided partial
                       Multi-player                                                                              proposed framework.
                                                                     feature. In order to handle player
Ruiheng Zhang et al.   tracking in             Cascade Mask RCNN                                                To     refine   2D detection,
                                                                     identity switch, the method
2020 [209]             sports                                                                                    temporal information needs
                                                                     correlates the coefficients of player
                                                                                                                 to be considered and can be
                                                                     ID in the K-shortest path with ID.
                                                                                                                 transferred       to     tracking
                                                                     The proposed framework achieves
                                                                                                                 against                  real-time
                                                                     the state-of-art performance.
                                                                                                                 performance       like    soccer,
                                                                                                                 basketball etc.
                       Individual
                                                                                                                Tracking by jersey number
R L Castro et al.      player tracking                               Achieved an Area Under Curve
                                                                                                                 recognition may increase the
2019 [212]             in          sports      Deep Neural Network   (AUC) of 66%
                                                                                                                 performance of the model.
                       events.
                                                                                                                The architecture is bound to
                                                                                                                 individual-oriented sports
                       Skelton-based                                 The proposed architecture                   and can be further
                       key              pose   Boltzmann machine +   successfully analyses feature               implemented on group based
Cao Zhi-chao et al.
                       recognition and                CNN            extraction, motion attitude model,          sports, in case of challenges
2019 [200]
                       classification in         Deep Boltzmann      motion detection and behavior               like severe occlusion,
                       sports                    machine + RNN       recognition of sports posture.              misdetection due to failure
                                                                                                                 in blob detection in object
                                                                                                                 tracking.
                                                                                                                The model fails in the case of
                                                                                                                 scaling up the dataset for
                                                                                                                 larger classification which
                       Human action
                                                                     The proposed method achieved an             shows ambiguity between
Mohammad Ashraf        recognition and
                                                                      accuracy of 92% for ten types of           players         and        similar
Russo et al. 2019      classification in
                                                                              sports classification.             environmental conditions.
[222]                  sports
                                                                                                                Football, Hockey; Tennis,
                                                 VGG 16 + RNN                                                    Badminton;                Skiing,
                                                                                                                 Snowboarding; these pairs of
                                                                                                                        classes        have        similar
                                                                                                                        environmental feature’s, thus
                                                                                                                        it’s only possible to separate
                                                                                                                        them       based     on   relevant
                                                                                                                        actions      which        can    be
                                                                                                                        achieved by state-of-the-art
                                                                                                                        methods.
                                                                          The framework is evaluated on
                                                                                                                       Performance of the proposed
                                                                          dataset which consists of 20 videos
                                                                                                                        method drops in case of
                           Replay and key                                 of four different sports categories. It
                                                                                                                        absence of gradual transition
Ali Javed et al. 2019      event detection         Extreme Learning       achieves an average accuracy of
                                                                                                                        of replay segments.
[236]                      for sports video         Machine (ELM)         95.8%     which      illustrates   the
                                                                                                                       It   can     be      extended by
                           summarization                                  significance of the method in terms
                                                                                                                        incorporating             artificial
                                                                          of key-event and replay detection
                                                                                                                        intelligence techniques.
                                                                          for video summarization.
                                                                                                                       It can be extended to double
                           Event detection
                                                                          The proposed method is accurate               games       with      fine-grained
                           in sports videos
                                                                          in unsupervised player extraction,            action       recognition        for
                           for
SubhajitChaudhury                                 Mask RCNN + LSTM        which is used for precise temporal            detecting various kinds of
                           unstructured
et al. 2019 [227]                                                         segmentation of rally scenes. It is           shots in an unstructured
                           environments
                                                                          also robust to noise in the form of           videos and it can be extended
                           with      arbitrary
                                                                          camera shaking and occlusions.                to analyze videos of games
                           camera angles.
                                                                                                                        like cricket, soccer etc.
                           Human motion                                                                                Instead of the Stochastic
                           quality                                                                                      Gradient Descent technique
Yedong Li et al.           assessment        in   3 Dimensional CNN       . Achieved an accuracy of 81% on              for learning rate, using the
2019 [228]                 complex                                                MS-COCO dataset.                      Cosine annealing scheduler
                           motion                                                                                       technique may improve the
                           scenarios.                                                                                   performance.
                                                                                                                       As the overlapping of players
                                                                                                                        increases the accuracy of
                                                                                                                        detection, tracking decreases
                           Court                                                                                        due to similar features of
                           detection using
                                                  Template Matching +       The proposed method achieves                same team players.
Stephen Karungaru et al.   markers, player
                                                     Particle Filter       better accuracy (94%) in case of            The method uses template
2019 [210]                 detection and
                                                                              overlapping of two players                matching algorithm, which
                           tracking using a
                           drone.                                                                                       can be replaced with deep
                                                                                                                        learning based state-of-art
                                                                                                                        algorithm to acquire better
                                                                                                                        results.
                                                                                                                       If the target scales changes
                           Target tracking
                                                                                                                        then the tracking of player
                           theory and                                     Achieves better tracking accuracy
                                                                                                                        fail’s due to the unchanged
QiuliHui. 2019 [211]       analyses its                                   compared to existing algorithms
                                                  Mean Shift + Particle                                                 window         of      mean-shift
                           advantages in                                  like TMS and CMS algorithms.
                           video tracking.               Filter                                                         algorithm. Also it cannot
                                                                                                                        track      objects    which     are
                                                                                                   similar to the background
                                                                                                   color.
                                                                                                  The accuracy of tracking
                                                                                                   players can be improved by
                                                                                                   replacing them with artificial
                                                                                                   intelligence algorithms.
                                                                                                  The architecture can be
                                                            Describes a novel method for           improved by fine tuning end-
                      Automatically
 Antonio Tejero-de-                                         automatic summarization of user-       to-end manner with a larger
                      generating       a
 Pablos et al. 2018                         2D CNN + LSTM   generated sports videos and            dataset    for     illustrating
                      summary          of
 [235]                                                      demonstrated the results for           potential performance and
                      sports video.
                                                            Japanese fencing videos.               also to evaluate in the context
                                                                                                   of wider variety of sports.
                                                                                                  In case, the object takes up
                                                                                                   most part of the frame, the
                                                                                                   human detector cannot
                                                SVM                                                completely cover the body
                      Action
                                                                                                   of the object. This leads to
 Ke Xu et al. 2017    Recognition                           Achieved an accuracy of 59.47%
                                                                                                   missing movements of body
 [226]                and                                   on HMDB 51 dataset.
                                                                                                   parts like hands and arms.
                      classification
                                                                                                   And also recognition of
                                                                                                   similar movements are the
                                                                                                   challenges for this
                                                                                                   architecture.




4.9 Overview of Machine Learning/Deep Learning Techniques
There are multiple ways to classify, detect, and track objects to analyze the semantic levels involved in
various sports. It paves the way for player localization, jersey number recognition, event classification,
trajectory forecasting of the ball, etc., in a sports video with a much better interpretation of an image as a
whole.
Figure 8: Block diagram of road map to machine learning architecture selection and training




 Figure 9: Block diagram of road map to deep learning architecture selection and training
  Figure 10: Overview of Deep Learning Algorithms of classification/detection, tracking and trajectory prediction

The selected AI algorithm is better if it is tested and benchmarked on the different data. For that to evaluate
the robustness of AI algorithms some metrics are required, which measures the performance of particular
AI algorithm to enable better selection. Figure 8 depicts the road map of the machine learning algorithms'
general information, methods, and evaluation criteria for a particular task and required libraries/tools for
training the model. Whereas Figure 9 depicts the roadmap of the deep learning algorithm selection, training,
and evaluation criteria for a particular task and required libraries/tools for training the model. Figure 10
shows taxonomy of various deep learning techniques of classification [239]-[245], detection algorithms
[246], unsupervised learning [247] [248], tracking [249]-[258], and trajectory prediction [259]-[266]. Since
various tasks in sports such as classification/detection, tracking, and trajectory prediction show great
advantages in various sports.


5 Available Datasets of Sports
        In this section, a brief description of some sports video (or) image datasets which are available
publicly with annotations are provided. Utilizing these shared datasets provides a platform for comparison
of performance of algorithms with common data for improving the transparency in research in this domain.
Additionally, sharing the data among the users (researchers) reduces extremely time-consuming efforts of
capturing and annotating large quantities of videos in diversified areas. This allows users to get a benchmark
scores for the algorithms developed.
           These shared datasets can be categorized into two types: Videos or still images, which are typically
taken with moving cameras, particularly of individual athletes or of team sports, for the purpose of
recognition of player actions [91, 160, 224, 225, 267, 269, 270, 273], event detection and classification [32,
96, 268], which are often captured using several setups of static cameras, for the purpose of detection and
tracking of player/ball [272, 274, 277], pose estimation [276], and sports event summarization [275] in the
team plays. One dataset focuses on the actions of the spectators of an event in sports rather than the players.
These datasets which are available for analysis are large performing a great variety of actions. Table 10
describes the available datasets of various sports, mode of dataset, annotated parameters, number of frames
and length of the video.
           The parameters which are annotated in ISSIA dataset relate to positions of the ball, player and
referee in each video from each camera. The images shown in figure 11 are few sample frames from ISSIA
dataset.




                                   Figure 11 Sample frames from ISSIA dataset [274]
The parameters which are annotated in the TTNet dataset are the ball bouncing moments, ball hitting the
net and empty events. The images shown in figure 12 are few samples frames from the TTNet dataset.




                                Figure 12 Sample frames from TTNet dataset [268]

For creation of APIDIS dataset videos are captured from seven cameras from above and around the court.
The events which are annotated in this dataset are player positions, movements of referee, baskets and
position of the ball. The images shown in figure 13 are the few samples from the APIDIS dataset.




                                Figure 13 Sample frames from APIDIS dataset [275]
Table 10 Details of available dataset

                                                                                                                                Length of Video and
    Ref.             Sport                 Dataset               Mode of Dataset                Annotated parameters
                                                                                                                                 Number of Images
                                                                                                                              Dataset was categorized
                                          Image type                                           Events such as free kick,
 K Ali et al.                                                   Event detection and                                               as train, test, and
                     Soccer        Football Keyword                                             penalty kick, tackle, red
  2021 [96]                                                        Classification.                                              validation with 5000,
                                           Dataset                                                 card, yellow card.
                                                                                                                                500, and 500 images.
                                                                                                                              Dataset consists video of
 X Gu et al.                                                                                      Dribbling, Passing,          8 hours duration, 3399
                   Basketball       Basketball dataset          Action Recognition
 2020 [267]                                                                                            Shooting                 annotations and 130
                                                                                                                               samples of each class.
                                                                                                                              Highlights dataset and the
                                                                                                Annotated with strokes
A Gupta et al.                     Video type Cricket                                                                          Generic dataset which
                     Cricket                                Cricket Stroke Localization.         played in untrimmed
 2020 [116]                             Strokes Dataset                                                                         comprised of Cricket
                                                                                                        videos.
                                                                                                                              telecast videos at 25FPS.
                                                                                                                               5 Videos of 10-25 min
 Roman V et                        Video type TTNet                                              Ball bounces, Net hit,
                  Table Tennis                            Ball detection and Event Spotting                                   duration for training and
  al. [268]                                 dataset                                                  Empty Events
                                                                                                                              7 short videos for testing
                                                                                                                              Handles a length of video
                                                                                                                                about 764 hours and
    Silvio                                Image type
                                                                                                                              6,637 moments which are
 Giancola et                            SoccerNet and                                          Goal, Yellow/Red Card,
                     Soccer                               Action spotting in soccer videos                                      split into three major
al. 2018 [269,                           SoccerNetv2                                                  Substitution
                                                                                                                                classes (Substitution,
     91]                                    dataset
                                                                                                                                Goal and Yellow/Red
                                                                                                                                       Card).
                                                                                                 Person-level actions,
 Mostafa S.                                                                                    Temporal dynamics of a
                                                                                                                                  1525 frames were
 Ibrahim et        Volleyball       Volleyball dataset       Group activity recognition           person’s action and
                                                                                                                                     annotated.
al.2016 [160]                                                                                   Temporal evolution of
                                                                                                     group activity
                                                                                                                                 Video type dataset.
D. Conigliaro                           The Spectators                                          spectator categorization
                                                                                                                                       31 sec
 et al. 2015        Hockey                Hockey (S-      Analyzing Crowds at the Stadium        such as position, head
                                                                                                                                        30 fps
    [270]                                  HOCK)                                               pose, posture and action

A. Karpathy
                 487 classes of                           Sports classification and activity
 et al. 2014                       Sports-1M dataset                                                Activity labels                  5 m 36 sec
                     sports                                         recognition.
    [271]
S.A. Pettersen                      Player position in
 et al. 2014         Soccer              soccer video          Player tracking system           Trajectories of players                45 min
    [272]                                  Dataset
                                                                                               Seven activities such as
                                                               Activity Detection and
G. Waltner et                       Indoor volleyball                                          serve, reception, setting,              23 min
                   Volleyball                                       Recognition
al. 2014 [224]                              dataset                                            attack, block, stand, and                25 fps
                                                                                               defense/move             are
                                                                                       annotated to each player
                                                                                       in this dataset.




                Various jump
                games, various
                                                                                                                         Video type dataset.
J.C. Niebles    throw games,
                                  Olympic Sports       Recognition of complex human    Different poses in               It contains 16 sports
 et al. 2010    bowling, tennis
                                  Dataset                    activities in sports      different sports                    classes, with 50
   [273]        serve, diving,
                                                                                                                        sequences per class.
                     and
                weightlifting.
                                                                                                                       The video type dataset.
                                                                                       Event classification,
V.Ramanatha                                                                                                            Length 1.5 hours long
                  Basketball      NCAA Dataset              Event Recognition          Event detection and
n et al. [32]                                                                                                         Annotated with 11 types
                                                                                       Evaluation of attention.
                                                                                                                              of events.
T. D’Orazio
                                    ISSIA Soccer       Objective way of Ground Truth        Player and Ball                     2 min
 et al. 2009        Soccer
                                       Dataset                  Generation                     trajectories                    25 fps
   [274]
    C.D.
                                                                                         Basketball events like
Vleeschouwe                       APIDIS                                                                                      16 mina,
                  Basketball                             sport-event summarization        position of players,
r et al. 2008                     Basketball Dataset                                                                            22fps
                                                                                              referees, ball.
   [275]
                 Badminton,
                  Basketball,
                                  Martial Arts,
W Zhang et         Football,                                                             It is annotated with 5       Size of dataset is 53000
                                  Dancing and           3D human pose estimation.
  al. [276]        Rugby,                                                                   types of actions.                  frames.
                                  Sports dataset
                   Tennis,
                  Volleyball
                 Kicking, golf
                swing, lifting,
                diving, riding
KhurramSoo                                                                              Action localization and
                    horse,        UCF Sports                                                                            13k clips and 27 h of
 mro et al.                                                 Action Recognition         the class label for activity
                skateboarding,    Action Dataset                                                                             video data
 2014 [225]                                                                                   recognition.
                   running,
                   walking,
                 swing-side.
                                                                                       Far-view shot, Medium-
                                                                                                                      350 soccer videos of total
N Feng et al.                                            Shot segmentation, Event        view shot, Close-view
                    Soccer        SSET                                                                                      length 282 h
 2020 [277]                                              detection, Player Tracking     shot, Out-of-field shot,
                                                                                                                               25 fps
                                                                                           and Playback shot.
6 GPU-Based Work Stations and Embedded Platforms
           To find the target, GPU-constrained devices such as Raspberry Pi, Latte Panda, Odroid Xu4 and
Computer Vision were used. The disadvantages of machine learning techniques are that they provide poor
or inaccurate results and have issues in predicting an unknown future data. Whereas deep learning
algorithms provide accurate results and also make predictions from unknown future data. Segmentation,
localization and image classification are visual recognition systems which have prominent research
contributions.
           Among embedded AI computing platforms, NVidia Jetson devices provide low-power computing
and high-performance support for artificial intelligence based visual recognition systems. Jetson modules
are configured with OpenCV, cuDNN, CUDA Toolkit, L4T with LTS Linux kernel and TensorRT.
Intel Movidius Neural Compute Stick uses Intel Movidius Neural Compute SDK in GPU-Constrained
devices to deploy AI algorithms.
           S. Wang et al. [199] presented a high-speed stereo vision system which can track the motion of the
golf ball at a speed of 360 km/h under indoor lighting conditions. They implemented the algorithm on field-
programmable gate array board with advanced RISC machine CPU. P R Kamble et al. [59] implemented a
deep learning approach to track the soccer ball on NVIDIA GTX1050Ti GPU. L Chen et al. [41]
implemented deep learning algorithm on GTX 1080 ti GPU, based on CUDA 9.0 and Caffe to analyze the
technical features in basketball video. Table 11 shows the basic comparison between GPU based devices
and GPU-constraint devices and possible deep learning algorithms to implement on various devices.


Table 11 Comparison between Jetson Modules and GPU-Constrained Devices
                 Jetson TX1           Jetson TX2          Jetson     AGX     Raspberry     Pi   Latte Panda       Odroid Xu4
                                                          Xavier             Series
 CPU             Quad core ARM        Dual         core   64 bit CPU and     63-bit quad core   Intel    Cherry   Cortex A7 octa
                 Processor.           Denver CPU and      8-core ARM         ARM                Train quad core   core CPU
                                      quad core ARM                                             CPU
                                      57
 GPU             NVidia Maxwell       NVidia   Pascall    Tensor cores +     -                  -                 -
                 with         CUDA    with     CUDA       512-core   Volta
                 cores                cores               GPU
 Memory          4GB Memory           8 GB Memory         16 GB Memory       1 GB Memory        4 GB Memory       Stacked memory
                                                                                                                  of 2 Giga bytes.
 Storage         16      GB   Flash   32 GB storage       32 GB storage      Support Micro SD   64 GB storage     Support    Micro
                 Storage                                                     card                                 SD Card
 Possible Deep   YOLO v2 and v3, tiny YOLO v3, SSD, Faster –RCNN and         YOLO, YOLO v2 and SSD-MobileNet etc.
 Learning        Tracking algorithm like YOLOv3+Deep SORT, YOLOv4,
 Algorithms to   YOLOR.
 Implement.
Field Programmable Gate Array (FPGA) has also been used in sports involving 3D motion capturing, object
movement analysis and image recognition, etc. Table 12 describes how different researchers performed
various problem statements of sports on hardware platforms such as FPGA, GPU-based devices and their
results in terms of performance measures are listed.

Table 12 Performance of various studies on hardware platforms

                       GPU Based Work    Embedded                                              Performance
         Ref               Station       platform          Problem Statement                     measures             Result
  L Wu et al. 2019      NVidia Titan X              Events classifications in basketball
        [27]                GPU.            -                        videos.                Average Accuracy         58.10%
                                                      Basketball trajectory prediction
  Yu Z et al. 2018                                   based on real data and generating     Measured in terms of
        [36]           NVIDIA GTX 960       -             new trajectory samples.                  AUC               91.00%
                                                                                           The result shows the
                                                                                                three-level
                                                                                           identification system      4.14%,
                                                    Recognizing swimming styles of a       in Average, Minimum        2.16%,
 T Liang 2020 [279]
                              -           FPGA                   swimmer.                  and Maximum offset.        5.77%.
     J Hou et al.                                                                                                    85% and
     2020[194]                              -                                              Recall and Specificity     96.6%
                                                      Tracking ball movements and
 Y Yoon et al. 2019    NVidia GeForce       -           classification of players in                                74.3% and
        [31]             GTX 1080Ti                          basketball game               Precision and Recall       89.8%
                                                       Ball detection and tracking to
                                                         reconstruct trajectories in
  Z dou 2020 [279]                        FPGA               basketball sport.                   Accuracy             >90%
 L Chen et al. 2020    NVidia GTX 1080
        [41]               ti GPU           -       Analyzing behaviour of the player.           Accuracy              83%
                                                                                                                    Varies from
                                                                                                                      12% -
                                                                                                                     100% for
                                                                                                                     different
                                                      Detecting movement of ball in        Average rate vs Frame      frame
  L Yin et al. [280]          -           FPGA               basketball sport.                     range              range.
  R L Castro et al.      NVidia GTX                 Individual player tracking in sports     Achieved an Area
     2019 [212]            1080Ti           -                        events.               Under Curve (AUC)           66%
   Y Ganesh et al.     NVidia GeForce                                                      Accuracy in terms of
     2019 [83]           GTX 1080Ti         -          Action recognition in soccer              F1 Score            52.80%
                                                        Movement classification in
                                                     basketball sport based on Virtual
    H Bao et al.                                      Reality Technology to improve
     2020[281]                -           FPGA             basketball coaching.                  Accuracy            93.50%
  P.R Kamble et al.      NVidia GTX                 Detection and tracking of ball in
     2019 [59]             1050Ti           -       soccer videos.                               Accuracy            87.45%
                                                     Action recognition based on arm
   G junjun [282]                       FPGA          movement in basketball sport.      Accuracy    92.30%




7 Applications in Sports Vision
A fan who is digitally connected becomes the biggest influencer online of sports venues. The teams and
stadium owners who provide plenty of personalized experiences through their custom apps, mobile phone
support for the content with offers, and live updates of the game information using digital boards increase
the engagement of fans and in turn generate opportunities for new revenues [283]. Figure 14 depicts
where AI technology can be used within the sporting landscape.




                              Figure 14 AI Technology Framework for the Sport Industry

7.1 Chabot’s& Smart Assistants
Recently, sports teams like NHL and NBA started using virtual assistants for responding to enquires done
by fans in a wide range of topics like ticketing, arena logistics, parking and other game related information.
If the bots are not capable, such scenarios are handled by human intervention and they maintain customer
service for that.
7.2 Video highlights
The challenges facing the industry include not just creation of content but also delivering it to customers
through multiple devices and screens for viewing different content at different times. There is a serious
demand from fans for in-depth analysis and also for commentary. Many others like action packed highlights
and some behind-the -scenes content as well.

Introducing AI enables solving challenging tasks in various sports and it provides an exciting viewing
experience to the audience, attracting more viewers.

7.3 Training & Coaching
An effective way for improving the analysis of performance of athletes and also assisting coaches with
team guidance to gauge the tactics of the opponents are gaining popularity.

An application which uses AI contains huge data set of game performances and training related information
which is backed up with the knowledge of several coaches and sports scientists. They act as an accumulated
source for dissemination of current knowledge on dissemination of latest techniques, tactics or knowledge
for professional coaches.

With the evolution of any body of knowledge on any tactic or technique, the knowledge base of AI is
updated. The accumulated data can be used for training and educating sports coaches, scientists and also
athletes, which in-turn leads to improved performance.

7.4 Virtual Umpires
In cricket and tennis, we see Video Assistant referee (VAR) and Decision Review System (DRS) which
take into consideration Hawk-eye, slow motion replays and some other technologies already being used.
But the catch is that these involve request from players or team for review when an umpire’s or referee’s
decision has some uncertainty involving other parties to assist the main umpire, the whole process is also
time consuming taking away the momentum and excitement of the game.

Latest camera technology supporting AI software creates a situation where an umpire’s role is limited to
on-field behaviour management of players rather than taking critical decisions. For example, in the case of
tennis with the use of computer vision for detecting placement and speed of the ball, the need for a line
umpire is completely eliminated. The future scope can be an umpire’s earpiece and glasses assisting the
decision instantly, eliminating the necessity of reviews.
7.5 AI Assistant Coaches
AI can be way more capable in situations involving a dynamic planning and analysis of the scene where a
coach would rely on previous data and experience, and it cannot really be so effective to frame dynamically
changing strategies in comparison to a machine. A future can be imagined in which a machine with AI
running alongside the gameplay is dynamically predicting and creating strategies, helping the teams to get
an edge over others. The evolution of chess technology is shown in figure 15.




                     Figure 15 Evolution of Chess technology demonstrates the speed of AI adoption.

One example where we can see the levels AI has achieved is in Chess. The Russian Garry Kasparov who
was considered world’s No.1 for about 19 years with Elo rating (skill level measurement) 2851 was
surpassed by Magnus Carlsen with Elo rating 2882 in 2014.

In computers, Deep Blue’s rating which was 2700+ was surpassed by Deep Mind’s Alpha Zero with an
estimated Elo 3600, which was developed by Google’s sibling DeepMind. It is developed by a
reinforcement learning technique called self-play. It took just 24 hours to achieve it, proving the capabilities
of the machine.
7.6 Available Commercial Systems for Player and Ball Tracking
Hawkeye [284, 285, 286] is the technology which is available for ball tracking in cricket, tennis and soccer.
The area of primary application is officiating in tennis, cricket and soccer to enhance broadcast videos.
Figure 16 shows visualization performance of the commercial systems.




                      Figure 16 Hawkeye Technology in Cricket, Tennis and Soccer [284, 285, 286]




                             Figure 17 TRACAB Gen5 Technology for Player Tracking [288]

STATS SportVU [287] and ChyronHego TRACAB [288] are the technologies available for player tracking
in sports. The area of primary application is to track players in various sports to analyse the performance of
players and to assist coaches for training. Figure 17 shows player position and pose estimation using
commercial systems. SportsVu is a computer vision technology which provides real-time optical tracking
in various sports. It provides in-depth performance of any team, in terms of tracking every player from both
the team to provide comprehensive match coverage, collecting data to provide tactical analysis of the match
and highlighting the performance deviations to reduce injuries in the game.


8 Research Directions in Sports Vision
    Based on the investigation of available articles in sports, we were able to come out with various research
topics and identifies research directions to be taken for further research in sports. They are categorized
based on the task specifics in sports applications (such as major sports in which player/ball/referee detection
and tracking, pose estimation, trajectory prediction is required) as shown in figure 18 to provide promising
and potential research directions for future computer vision/video processing in various sports.




                               Figure 18 Major task-specifics in sports applications

As sporting activities are dynamic in nature, the accuracy and reliability of a single player or multi-player
tracking [60, 212] in real time sports video can be enhanced by proposing a framework that learns object
identities with deep representations which resolve the problem of identity switch among players [209]. By
considering the temporal information, the performance of tracking algorithm can become robust to
overcome problems like severe occlusions, miss-detection etc.

The accuracy of classifying different defensive strategies of various sports can be improved by labelling
large spatio-temporal datasets; and, also by classifying the actions into subtypes [83], the accuracy of action
recognition can be enhanced. The performance measures of team tactics analysis [88, 90] of soccer videos
can be enhanced by analyzing player trajectories. By incorporating the temporal information, the
classification accuracy can be improved while it also offers more specific insights to situations like pass
events in the case of non-obvious insights in sports videos. Accurate pose detection as shown in figure 19
is still a major challenge to identify whether the player is running, jumping or walking as shown in figure
20, and also to handle the severe occlusions or identity switch among players.




     Figure 19 Detecting body pose and limbs            Figure 20 Handling severe occlusions among the players

In order to assess the player’s batting caliber in cricket, certain aspects of batting also need to be considered
i.e. position of batsman before playing shot and way of batting shots for a particular bowling type needs to
be modeled [111]. Classification technique can minimize false positives and false negatives to detect and
classify umpire poses [127]. Detecting various moments like whether the ball hit the bat and precise
detection of player and wicket skipper at the moment of run outs, as shown in figure 21, is still a major
issue in cricket. Predicting the trajectory of ball bowled by spin bowlers as shown in figure 22 can be
resolved accurately by labeling large dataset and modeling using SOTA algorithms.




Figure 21 Precise detecting at the moment of run outs     Figure 22 Predicting trajectory of ball, in-line or out-line etc.
Recognition accuracy of player action in badminton game [187] can be improved by SOTA computer vision
algorithms and fine tuning end-to-end manner with a larger dataset on feature extracted at different fully
connected layers. In the implementation of automatic linesman system in badminton game, the algorithm
is not robust to the far views of the camera, where illumination conditions heavily impact the system while
the speed of the shuttle cock is also a major factor for poor accuracy. So, it is needed to track the path,
which becomes simpler to referee to decide if a shuttle lands out or in as shown in fig 23.




                                    Figure 23 Exact spot on which shuttle lands

8.1 Open Issues and Future Research Areas
         Computer vision plays a vital role in the area of sports video processing. To analyse sports events,
there are many issues open for research. Calibration and viewpoints of the camera to capture the sports
events such as close-up views, far views and wide views in degree of occlusions etc., are still issues that
have not been satisfactorily addressed.

         Detecting the ball in various sports helps to detect and classify various ball based events such as
goals, possession of the ball and many other events. Due to the size, speed, velocity and unstructured motion
of the ball compared to players and playfield in various sports, it is still an open issue to detect and track
the ball. Various AI algorithms have been developed to achieve better performance in various sports such
as soccer, basketball, tennis and badminton in terms of detecting and tracking with respect to various aspects
of the ball.

         Tracking players and ball is the one of the most open area for research which includes various
issues such as fast and frequent movements of the players, similar appearance of players due to jersey colour
in team sports, often partial and full occlusions of players, etc. Various algorithms use linear motions for
multi-player tracking, resulting in poor performance but solves data association problems with appearance
models. However, this algorithms fails in various conditions such as severe occlusions, ambiguity of
appearance between players etc.
8.2 Future Research Trends according to Methodologies in Sports Vision
         In this section, we aim to set forth the methodological approach to various components of detection,
classification and tracking in sports. By considering the deep analysis of sports studies, it will be clear that
the performance of the algorithm depends on the type (annotation parameters) of dataset used, which is
carried out based on loss functions and evaluation metrics. The major difficulties in real time use of AI
algorithms in various research areas of sports are accuracy, computation speed, size of the model etc.
Considering all these aspects, the development of future trends based on contemporary ideas are presented
below.

     Due to the continuous movements of player, jersey number encounter serious deformation and
         various image size and low resolution makes difficult to read jersey number [201]. Player’s similar
         appearance and severe occlusions make difficult to track and identify players, referees and goal
         keepers reliably, which causes the critical problem of identity switch among players [209]. To solve
         these challenges, a framework is needed to be proposed that learns object identities with deep
         representations and improves tracking using information pertaining to identity.
     The algorithms employed to detect and track the state of the ball such as whether it is controlled by
         a player (Dribbling), moving on the ground (passed from one player to another player) or flying in
         the air to categorize the movement as rolling pass or lobbing pass are not robust with respect to size
         of ball, shape of the ball, velocity etc. and under different environmental conditions. A few
         researchers have come forward with novel ideas to deal with the above mentioned aspects [59, 199,
         102, 207, 193, 66, 282] but research is still at a nascent stage.
     Conventional architectures of detecting, classifying and tracking are replaced with more promising
         and potential modern learning paradigms such as Online Learners and Extreme Learning Machine
         etc.

8.3 Different Challenges to Overcome in Sports Studies
     Classification of jersey numbers in sports like soccer and basketball is quite simple [201] as they
         have plain jersey but in case of the sports like hockey and American football, the jerseys are massive
         and have sharp contours, due to which jersey number recognition is quite hard . By implementing
         proper bounding box techniques and digit recognition methods, better performance of jersey
         number recognition in every sport can be achieved.
     Action recognition in sports videos [220, 221] is explicitly a non -1inearity problem, which can be
         obtained by aligning feature vectors, by providing massive amount of discriminative video
         representations, can provide a way to capture the temporal structure of video that is not present in
         the dynamic image space and analyzing salient regions of frames for action recognition.
     Provisional tactical analysis related to player formation in sports such as soccer [97], basketball,
        rugby, American football and hockey etc., and pass prediction [84, 85, 86, 93], shot prediction [76],
        expectation for goals given a game state [77] or possession of ball, or more general game strategies
        can be achieved through AI algorithms.
     Recognition of fine-grained activity of typical badminton strokes can be performed by using off-
        the-shelf sensors [188], and it can be replaced with automatic detection and tagging of
        aspects/events in the game and use of CCTV-grade digital cameras without additional sensors.
     Identity of the player is lost when the player moves out of the frame and to retain the identity when
        the players reappear in subsequent frames, the player must be recognized. The key challenges for
        player recognition is detecting the pose of the player [54] which is the most difficult recognition
        challenge, especially in case of resolution effects, variable illuminations or lighting effects and
        severe occlusions.


9 Conclusion
        Sports video analysis is an emerging and very dynamic field of research. This study
comprehensively reviewed sports video analysis for various applications such as tracking player or ball in
sports and predicting the trajectories of player or ball, player skill and team’s strategies analysis, detecting
and classifying objects in sports. As per the requirements of deploying computer vision techniques in
various sports, we have provided some of the publicly available datasets related to a particular sport.
Detailed discussion on GPU based work station, embedded platforms and AI applications in sports have
been presented. We have presented various classical techniques and AI techniques employed in sports, their
performance, pros, cons and suitability to particular sports. We have listed probable research directions,
existing challenges and current research trends with a brief discussion and also widely used computer vision
techniques in various sports.

        Individual player tracking in sports is very helpful for coaches and personal trainers. Though the
sports includes particularly challenging tasks like similarities between players, generation of blurry video
segments in some cases, partially or fully occlusions between players, invisibility of jersey number in some
cases etc., computer vision is the best possible solution to achieve.

        Classification of jersey numbers in sports like soccer and basketball is quite simple as they have
plain jersey but in case of sports like hockey and American football, the jerseys are massive and come with
sharp contours, due to which the jersey number recognition is quite hard. By implementing proper bounding
box techniques and digit recognition methods, better performance vis-a-vis jersey number recognition in
every sport can be achieved. As the appearance of players varies from sport to sport, the algorithm trained
on one sport may not work when it is tested on another sport. The problem may be solved by considering a
dataset which contains a small set of samples from every sport for fine-tuning.

        In case of multi-player tracking in real time sports videos, severe occlusions cause critical problem
of identity switch among the players. Continuous movement of player’s makes difficult to read jersey
number. A player’s similar appearance to another and severe occlusions make it difficult to track and
identify players, referees and goal keepers reliably. Multiple object tracking in sports is a key prerequisite
for realization of advanced operations in sports, such as player movement and their position in sports which
will give good objective criteria to the team manager for developing a new plan to improve team
performance as well as evaluate each player accurately.

        Commercially used multi-camera tracking systems of players rely on some mixture of manual and
automated tracking and player labeling. Optical tracking systems are a good approach for tracking players
occluding each other or players having a similar appearance. The algorithm may detect false positives from
out of the court such as fans wearing team uniform, as the appearance of fans is similar to that of players.
This can be eliminated by estimating the playground area or broadcast camera parameters with extra
spatiotemporal locations of player positions.

        Action recognition in sports videos is explicitly a non-linearity problem, which can be obtained by
aligning feature vectors, by providing massive amount discriminative video representations; to capture the
temporal structure of the video that is not present in the dynamic image space and analyzing the salient
regions of the frames for action recognition.

        The algorithms employed so far for detecting and tracking ball movements began with estimating
3D ball position in trajectory. Employing these methods is very critical, as they include a lot of
mathematical relations and require reliable reference objects to construct the path of the trajectory. Kalman
filter and particle filter based methods are robust with respect to size, shape and velocity of the ball.
However, the methods fail to establish the track when the ball reappears after occlusion. Trajectory based
methods solve the problem of occlusion and are robust in obtaining data with regard to missing and merging
balls but fail in case of the size and shape of the ball. Data association methods are best suited for detecting
and tracking small size balls in small courts like tennis but are not suited for challenges in sports like
basketball, soccer, volleyball etc. AI algorithms predict the precise trajectories of the ball from a knowledge
of previous frames and are immune to challenges like air friction, ball spin and other complex ball
movements. A precise database which includes different size and shape of the ball has to be introduced in
order to detect the ball position and enable tracking algorithms to perform efficiently.
        Detection and tracking of player, ball and assistant referee as well as semantic scene understanding
in computer vision applications of sports is still an open research area due to various challenges like sudden
and rapid changes in movements of the players and ball, similar appearance, players with extreme aspect
ratios (players will have extremely small aspect ratios in terms of height and width when they fall down on
the field) and frequent occlusions. Future scope of the computer vision research in the sports therefore
handles limitations more accurately on different AI algorithms.

        As the betting process involves financial assets, it is important to decide which team is likely to
win; therefore, bookmakers, fans and potential bidders are all interested in estimating odds of the game in
advance. So, provisional tactical analysis of field sports related to player formation in sports such as soccer,
basketball, rugby, American football, and hockey etc., as well as pass prediction, shot prediction, and
expectations of goals in a given a game state or a possession, or more general game strategies are needed
to be analyzed in advance.

        Tracking algorithms which are used in various sports cannot be compared on a common scale as
experiments, requirements; situations and infrastructure in every scenario differ. Determining the
performance benchmark of algorithms quantitatively is quite difficult due to the unavailability of a
comparable database with ground truths of different sports differing in many aspects. In addition to these,
there are additional parameters like different video capturing devices and their parameter variations which
lead to difficulty in building an object tracking system in the sports field.


References
    1. Tan, D. Y. W., H. Y. Ting, and S. B. Y. Lau. "A review on badminton motion analysis." In 2016
       International Conference on Robotics, Automation and Sciences (ICORAS), pp. 1-4. IEEE, 2016.
    2. Bonidia, Robson P., Luiz AL Rodrigues, Anderson P. Avila-Santos, Danilo S. Sanches, and
       Jacques D. Brancher. "Computational intelligence in sports: A systematic literature
       review." Advances in Human-Computer Interaction 2018 (2018).
    3. Rahmad, Nur Azmina, Muhammad Amir As’Ari, Nurul Fathiah Ghazali, Norazman Shahar, and
       Nur Anis Jasmin Sufri. "A survey of video based action recognition in sports." Indonesian Journal
       of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science 11, no. 3 (2018): 987-993.
    4. van der Kruk, Eline, and Marco M. Reijne. "Accuracy of human motion capture systems for sport
       applications; state-of-the-art review." European journal of sport science 18, no. 6 (2018): 806-
       819.
    5. Manafifard, Mehrtash, Hamid Ebadi, and H. AbrishamiMoghaddam. "A survey on player tracking
       in soccer videos." Computer Vision and Image Understanding 159 (2017): 19-46.
    6. Thomas, Graham, Rikke Gade, Thomas B. Moeslund, Peter Carr, and Adrian Hilton. "Computer
       vision for sports: Current applications and research topics." Computer Vision and Image
       Understanding 159 (2017): 3-18.
    7. Cust, Emily E., Alice J. Sweeting, Kevin Ball, and Sam Robertson. "Machine and deep learning
       for sport-specific movement recognition: a systematic review of model development and
       performance." Journal of sports sciences 37, no. 5 (2019): 568-600.
8. Kamble, Paresh R., Avinash G. Keskar, and Kishor M. Bhurchandi. "Ball tracking in sports: a
    survey." Artificial Intelligence Review 52, no. 3 (2019): 1655-1705.
9. Shih, Huang-Chia. "A survey of content-aware video analysis for sports." IEEE Transactions on
    Circuits and Systems for Video Technology 28, no. 5 (2017): 1212-1231.
10. Beal, Ryan, Timothy J. Norman, and Sarvapali D. Ramchurn. "Artificial intelligence for team
    sports: a survey." The Knowledge Engineering Review 34 (2019).
11. Apostolidis, Evlampios, Eleni Adamantidou, Alexandros I. Metsai, Vasileios Mezaris, and Ioannis
    Patras. "Video Summarization Using Deep Neural Networks: A Survey." arXiv preprint
    arXiv:2101.06072 (2021).
12. Kini, Sowmya. "Real Time Moving Vehicle Congestion Detection and Tracking using
    OpenCV." Turkish Journal of Computer and Mathematics Education (TURCOMAT) 12, no. 10
    (2021): 273-279.
13. Davis, Michael. "Investigation into tracking football players from single viewpoint video
    sequences." Bachelor of Science, in Computer Science, The University of Bath (2008): 147.
14. Spagnolo, P., N. Mosca, M. Nitti, and A. Distante. "An unsupervised approach for segmentation
    and clustering of soccer players." In International Machine Vision and Image Processing
    Conference (IMVIP 2007), pp. 133-142. IEEE, 2007.
15. Le Troter, Arnaud, SebastienMavromatis, and Jean Sequeira. "Soccer field detection in video
    images using color and spatial coherence." In International Conference Image Analysis and
    Recognition, pp. 265-272. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2004.
16. Heydari, Mohammad, and Amir MasoudEftekhariMoghadam. "An MLP-based player detection
    and tracking in broadcast soccer video." In 2012 International Conference of Robotics and
    Artificial Intelligence, pp. 195-199. IEEE, 2012.
17. Barnard, Mark, and J-M. Odobez. "Robust playfield segmentation using MAP adaptation."
    In Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on Pattern Recognition, 2004. ICPR 2004.,
    vol. 3, pp. 610-613. IEEE, 2004.
18. Pallavi, V., Jayanta Mukherjee, Arun K. Majumdar, and ShamikSural. "Graph-based multiplayer
    detection and tracking in broadcast soccer videos." IEEE Transactions on Multimedia 10, no. 5
    (2008): 794-805.
19. Ul Huda, Noor, Kasper H. Jensen, Rikke Gade, and Thomas B. Moeslund. "Estimating the
    number of soccer players using simulation-based occlusion handling." In Proceedings of the IEEE
    Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops, pp. 1824-1833. 2018.
20. Ohno, Yoshinori, Jun Miura, and Yoshiaki Shirai. "Tracking players and estimation of the 3D
    position of a ball in soccer games." In Proceedings 15th International Conference on Pattern
    Recognition. ICPR-2000, vol. 1, pp. 145-148. IEEE, 2000.
21. Santiago, Catarina B., Armando Sousa, Luís Paulo Reis, and Maria LuísaEstriga. "Real time
    colour based player tracking in indoor sports." In Computational Vision and Medical Image
    Processing, pp. 17-35. Springer, Dordrecht, 2011.
22. Ren, Jinchang, James Orwell, Graeme A. Jones, and Ming Xu. "Tracking the soccer ball using
    multiple fixed cameras." Computer Vision and Image Understanding 113, no. 5 (2009): 633-642.
23. Kasuya, Nozomu, ItaruKitahara, Yoshinari Kameda, and Yuichi Ohta. "Real-time soccer player
    tracking method by utilizing shadow regions." In Proceedings of the 18th ACM international
    conference on Multimedia, pp. 1319-1322. 2010.
24. Homayounfar, Namdar, Sanja Fidler, and Raquel Urtasun. "Sports field localization via deep
    structured models." In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
    Recognition, pp. 5212-5220. 2017.
25. Leo, Marco, Nicola Mosca, Paolo Spagnolo, Pier Luigi Mazzeo, TizianaD'Orazio, and
    ArcangeloDistante. "Real-time multiview analysis of soccer matches for understanding
    interactions between ball and players." In Proceedings of the 2008 international conference on
    Content-based image and video retrieval, pp. 525-534. 2008.
26. Conaire, Ciarán Ó., Philip Kelly, Damien Connaghan, and Noel E. O'Connor. "Tennissense: A
    platform for extracting semantic information from multi-camera tennis data." In 2009 16th
    International Conference on Digital Signal Processing, pp. 1-6. IEEE, 2009.
27. Wu, Lifang, Zhou Yang, Jiaoyu He, MengJian, Yaowen Xu, Dezhong Xu, and Chang Wen Chen.
    "Ontology based global and collective motion patterns for event classification in basketball
    videos." IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology (2019).
28. Wu, Lifang, Zhou Yang, Qi Wang, Meng Jian, Boxuan Zhao, Junchi Yan, and Chang Wen Chen.
    "Fusing motion patterns and key visual information for semantic event recognition in basketball
    videos." Neurocomputing 413 (2020): 217-229.
29. Liu, Long. "Objects detection toward complicated high remote basketball sports by leveraging
    deep CNN architecture." Future Generation Computer Systems 119 (2021): 31-36.
30. Fu, Xubo, Kun Zhang, Changgang Wang, and Chao Fan. "Multiple player tracking in basketball
    court videos." journal of real-time image processing (2020).
31. Yoon, Young, Heesu Hwang, Yongjun Choi, MinbeomJoo, Hyeyoon Oh, Insun Park, Keon-Hee
    Lee, and Jin-Ha Hwang. "Analyzing basketball movements and pass relationships using realtime
    object tracking techniques based on deep learning." IEEE Access 7 (2019): 56564-56576.
32. Ramanathan, Vignesh, Jonathan Huang, Sami Abu-El-Haija, Alexander Gorban, Kevin Murphy,
    and Li Fei-Fei. "Detecting events and key actors in multi-person videos." In Proceedings of the
    IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 3043-3053. 2016.
33. Chakraborty, Bodhisattwa, and SukadevMeher. "A real-time trajectory-based ball detection-and-
    tracking framework for basketball video." Journal of Optics 42, no. 2 (2013): 156-170.
34. Santhosh, P. K., and B. Kaarthick. "An Automated Player Detection and Tracking in Basketball
    Game." CMC-Comput. Mater. Contin 58 (2019): 625-639.
35. Acuna, David. "Towards real-time detection and tracking of basketball players using deep neural
    networks." In 31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017). 2017.
36. Zhao, Yu, Rennong Yang, Guillaume Chevalier, Rajiv C. Shah, and Rob Romijnders. "Applying
    deep bidirectional LSTM and mixture density network for basketball trajectory
    prediction." Optik 158 (2018): 266-272.
37. Shah, Rajiv, and Rob Romijnders. "Applying deep learning to basketball trajectories." arXiv
    preprint arXiv:1608.03793 (2016).
38. Žemgulys, Julius, VidasRaudonis, RytisMaskeliūnas, and RobertasDamaševičius. "Recognition of
    basketball referee signals from real-time videos." Journal of Ambient Intelligence and Humanized
    Computing 11, no. 3 (2020): 979-991.
39. Liu, Wu, Chenggang Clarence Yan, Jiangyu Liu, and Huadong Ma. "Deep learning based
    basketball video analysis for intelligent arena application." Multimedia Tools and Applications 76,
    no. 23 (2017): 24983-25001.
40. Yao, Peng. "Real-Time Analysis of Basketball Sports Data Based on Deep
    Learning." Complexity 2021 (2021).
41. Chen, Li, and Wenbo Wang. "Analysis of technical features in basketball video based on deep
    learning algorithm." Signal Processing: Image Communication 83 (2020): 115786.
42. Wang, Kuan-Chieh, and Richard Zemel. "Classifying NBA offensive plays using neural networks."
    In Proceedings of MIT Sloan Sports Analytics Conference, vol. 4. 2016.
43. Tsai, Tsung-Yu, Yen-Yu Lin, Shyh-Kang Jeng, and Hong-Yuan Mark Liao. "End-to-end Key-
    Player-Based Group Activity Recognition Network Applied to Basketball Offensive Tactic
    Identification in Limited Data Scenarios." IEEE Access (2021).
44. Lamas, L., D. De Rose Junior, F. Santana, E. Rostaiser, L. Negretti, and C. Ugrinowitsch. "Space
    creation dynamics in basketball offence: validation and evaluation of elite teams." International
    Journal of Performance Analysis in Sport 11, no. 1 (2011): 71-84.
45. Bourbousson, Jérôme, Carole Sève, and Tim McGarry. "Space–time coordination dynamics in
    basketball: Part 1. Intra-and inter-couplings among player dyads." Journal of sports sciences 28,
    no. 3 (2010): 339-347.
46. Bourbousson, Jérôme, Carole Sève, and Tim McGarry. "Space–time coordination dynamics in
    basketball: Part 2. The interaction between the two teams." Journal of sports sciences 28, no. 3
    (2010): 349-358.
47. Tian, Changjia, Varuna De Silva, Michael Caine, and Steve Swanson. "Use of Machine Learning
    to Automate the Identification of Basketball Strategies Using Whole Team Player Tracking
    Data." Applied Sciences 10, no. 1 (2020): 24.
48. Hauri, Sandro, Nemanja Djuric, Vladan Radosavljevic, and Slobodan Vucetic. "Multi-Modal
    Trajectory Prediction of NBA Players." In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on
    Applications of Computer Vision, pp. 1640-1649. 2021.
49. Zheng, Stephan, YisongYue, and Jennifer Hobbs. "Generating long-term trajectories using deep
    hierarchical networks." Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 29 (2016): 1543-
    1551.
50. Victor, Brandon, Aiden Nibali, Zhen He, and David L. Carey. "Enhancing trajectory prediction
    using sparse outputs: application to team sports." Neural Computing and Applications (2021): 1-
    12.
51. Bertugli, Alessia, Simone Calderara, Pasquale Coscia, Lamberto Ballan, and Rita Cucchiara.
    "AC-VRNN: Attentive Conditional-VRNN for multi-future trajectory prediction." Computer Vision
    and Image Understanding 210 (2021): 103245.
52. Li, Hongfei, and Maolin Zhang. "Artificial Intelligence and Neural Network-Based Shooting
    Accuracy Prediction Analysis in Basketball." Mobile Information Systems 2021 (2021).
53. Chen, Hua-Tsung, Chien-Li Chou, Tsung-Sheng Fu, Suh-Yin Lee, and Bao-Shuh P. Lin.
    "Recognizing tactic patterns in broadcast basketball video using player trajectory." Journal of
    Visual Communication and Image Representation 23, no. 6 (2012): 932-947.
54. Chen, Hua-Tsung, Ming-Chun Tien, Yi-Wen Chen, Wen-Jiin Tsai, and Suh-Yin Lee. "Physics-
    based ball tracking and 3D trajectory reconstruction with applications to shooting location
    estimation in basketball video." Journal of Visual Communication and Image Representation 20,
    no. 3 (2009): 204-216.
55. Hu, Ming, and Qilin Hu. "Design of basketball game image acquisition and processing system
    based on machine vision and image processor." Microprocessors and Microsystems 82 (2021):
    103904.
56. Yichen, Wang, and Haruka Yamashita. "Lineup Optimization Model of Basketball Players Based
    on the Prediction of Recursive Neural Networks." International Journal of Economics and
    Management Engineering 15, no. 3 (2021): 283-289.
57. Gerke, Sebastian, Antje Linnemann, and Karsten Müller. "Soccer player recognition using spatial
    constellation features and jersey number recognition." Computer Vision and Image
    Understanding 159 (2017): 105-115.
58. Baysal, Sermetcan, and Pınar Duygulu. "Sentioscope: a soccer player tracking system using
    model field particles." IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology 26, no. 7
    (2015): 1350-1362.
59. Kamble, P. R., A. G. Keskar, and K. M. Bhurchandi. "A deep learning ball tracking system in
    soccer videos." Opto-Electronics Review 27, no. 1 (2019): 58-69.
60. Choi, Kyuhyoung, and Yongduek Seo. "Automatic initialization for 3D soccer player
    tracking." Pattern Recognition Letters 32, no. 9 (2011): 1274-1282.
61. Kim, Wonjun. "Multiple object tracking in soccer videos using topographic surface
    analysis." Journal of Visual Communication and Image Representation 65 (2019): 102683.
62. Liu, Jia, Xiaofeng Tong, Wenlong Li, Tao Wang, Yimin Zhang, and Hongqi Wang. "Automatic
    player detection, labeling and tracking in broadcast soccer video." Pattern Recognition Letters 30,
    no. 2 (2009): 103-113.
63. Komorowski, Jacek, Grzegorz Kurzejamski, and Grzegorz Sarwas. "BallTrack: Football ball
    tracking for real-time CCTV systems." In 2019 16th International Conference on Machine Vision
    Applications (MVA), pp. 1-5. IEEE, 2019.
64. Hurault, Samuel, Coloma Ballester, and Gloria Haro. "Self-Supervised Small Soccer Player
    Detection and Tracking." In Proceedings of the 3rd International Workshop on Multimedia
    Content Analysis in Sports, pp. 9-18. 2020.
65. Kamble, Paresh R., Avinash G. Keskar, and Kishor M. Bhurchandi. "A convolutional neural
    network based 3D ball tracking by detection in soccer videos." In Eleventh International
    Conference on machine vision (ICMV 2018), vol. 11041, p. 110412O. International Society for
    Optics and Photonics, 2019.
66. Naidoo, Wayne Chelliah, and Jules Raymond Tapamo. "Soccer video analysis by ball, player and
    referee tracking." In Proceedings of the 2006 annual research conference of the South African
    institute of computer scientists and information technologists on IT research in developing
    countries, pp. 51-60. 2006.
67. Liang, Dawei, Yang Liu, Qingming Huang, and Wen Gao. "A scheme for ball detection and
    tracking in broadcast soccer video." In Pacific-Rim Conference on Multimedia, pp. 864-875.
    Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2005.
68. Komorowski, Jacek, GrzegorzKurzejamski, and GrzegorzSarwas. "FootAndBall: Integrated player
    and ball detector." arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.05445 (2019).
69. Pallavi, V., Jayanta Mukherjee, Arun K. Majumdar, and Shamik Sural. "Ball detection from
    broadcast soccer videos using static and dynamic features." Journal of Visual Communication
    and Image Representation 19, no. 7 (2008): 426-436.
70. Leo, Marco, Pier Luigi Mazzeo, Massimiliano Nitti, and Paolo Spagnolo. "Accurate ball detection
    in soccer images using probabilistic analysis of salient regions." Machine vision and
    applications 24, no. 8 (2013): 1561-1574.
71. Mazzeo, Pier Luigi, Marco Leo, Paolo Spagnolo, and Massimiliano Nitti. "Soccer ball detection by
    comparing different feature extraction methodologies." Advances in Artificial Intelligence 2012
    (2012).
72. Garnier, Paul, and Théophane Gregoir. "Evaluating Soccer Player: from Live Camera to Deep
    Reinforcement Learning." arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.05388 (2021).
73. Kusmakar, Shitanshu, SergiyShelyag, Ye Zhu, Dan Dwyer, Paul Gastin, and Maia Angelova.
    "Machine Learning Enabled Team Performance Analysis in the Dynamical Environment of
    Soccer." IEEE Access 8 (2020): 90266-90279.
74. Baccouche, Moez, Franck Mamalet, Christian Wolf, Christophe Garcia, and AtillaBaskurt. "Action
    classification in soccer videos with long short-term memory recurrent neural networks."
    In International Conference on Artificial Neural Networks, pp. 154-159. Springer, Berlin,
    Heidelberg, 2010.
75. Jackman, Simeon. "Football Shot Detection using Convolutional Neural Networks." (2019).
76. Lucey, Patrick, AlinaBialkowski, Mathew Monfort, Peter Carr, and Iain Matthews. "qualityvs
    quantity: Improved shot prediction in soccer using strategic features from spatiotemporal data."
    In Proc. 8th annual mitsloan sports analytics conference, pp. 1-9. 2014.
77. Cioppa, Anthony, AdrienDeliege, Silvio Giancola, Bernard Ghanem, Marc Van Droogenbroeck,
    RikkeGade, and Thomas B. Moeslund. "A context-aware loss function for action spotting in
    soccer videos." In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
    Recognition, pp. 13126-13136. 2020.
78. Beernaerts, Jasper, Bernard De Baets, Matthieu Lenoir, and Nico Van de Weghe. "Spatial
    movement pattern recognition in soccer based on relative player movements." Plos one 15, no. 1
    (2020): e0227746.
79. Tepanyan, Hayk. "Soccer Stats with Computer Vision."
80. Kim, Yoonhyung, Chanho Jung, and Changick Kim. Motion Recognition of Assistant Referees in
    Soccer Games via Selective Color Contrast Revelation. No. 2604. EasyChair, 2020.
81. Lindström, Per, Ludwig Jacobsson, NiklasCarlsson, and Patrick Lambrix. "Predicting Player
    Trajectories in Shot Situations in Soccer." (2019).
82. Machado, Vinicius, Roger Leite, Felipe Moura, Sergio Cunha, Filip Sadlo, and João LD Comba.
    "Visual soccer match analysis using spatiotemporal positions of players." Computers &
    Graphics 68 (2017): 84-95.
83. Ganesh, Yaparla, Allaparthi Sri Teja, Sai Krishna Munnangi, and Garimella Rama Murthy. "A
    novel framework for fine grained action recognition in soccer." In International Work-Conference
    on Artificial Neural Networks, pp. 137-150. Springer, Cham, 2019.
84. Chawla, Sanjay, JoëlEstephan, Joachim Gudmundsson, and Michael Horton. "Classification of
    passes in football matches using spatiotemporal data." ACM Transactions on Spatial Algorithms
    and Systems (TSAS) 3, no. 2 (2017): 1-30.
85. Gyarmati, Laszlo, and RadeStanojevic. "Qpass: a merit-based evaluation of soccer
    passes." arXiv preprint arXiv:1608.03532 (2016).
86. Vercruyssen, Vincent, Luc De Raedt, and Jesse Davis. "Qualitative spatial reasoning for soccer
    pass prediction." In CEUR Workshop Proceedings, vol. 1842. 2016.
87. Yu, Junqing, Aiping Lei, and Yangliu Hu. "Soccer video event detection based on deep learning."
    In International Conference on Multimedia Modeling, pp. 377-389. Springer, Cham, 2019.
88. Brooks, Joel, Matthew Kerr, and John Guttag. "Using machine learning to draw inferences from
    pass location data in soccer." Statistical Analysis and Data Mining: The ASA Data Science
    Journal 9, no. 5 (2016): 338-349.
89. Cho, Hyeonah, Hyunyoung Ryu, and Minseok Song. "Pass2vec: Analyzing soccer players’
    passing style using deep learning." International Journal of Sports Science & Coaching (2021):
    17479541211033078.
90. Zhang, Kailai, Ji Wu, Xiaofeng Tong, and Yumeng Wang. "An automatic multi-camera-based
    event extraction system for real soccer videos." Pattern Analysis and Applications 23, no. 2
    (2020): 953-965.
91. Deliege, Adrien, Anthony Cioppa, Silvio Giancola, Meisam J. Seikavandi, Jacob V. Dueholm,
    Kamal Nasrollahi, Bernard Ghanem, Thomas B. Moeslund, and Marc Van Droogenbroeck.
    "Soccernet-v2: A dataset and benchmarks for holistic understanding of broadcast soccer videos."
    In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
    4508-4519. 2021.
92. Penumala, Radha, M. Sivagami, and Suresh Srinivasan. "Automated Goal Score Detection in
    Football Match Using Key Moments." Procedia Computer Science 165 (2019): 492-501.
93. Khan, Abdullah, Beatrice Lazzerini, Gaetano Calabrese, and Luciano Serafini. "Soccer event
    detection." In 4th International Conference on Image Processing and Pattern Recognition (IPPR
    2018), pp. 119-129. AIRCC Publishing Corporation, 2018.
94. Khaustov, Victor, and Maxim Mozgovoy. "Recognizing Events in Spatiotemporal Soccer
    Data." Applied Sciences 10, no. 22 (2020): 8046.
95. Saraogi, Himangi, Rahul Anand Sharma, and Vijay Kumar. "Event recognition in broadcast
    soccer videos." In Proceedings of the Tenth Indian Conference on Computer Vision, Graphics
    and Image Processing, pp. 1-7. 2016.
96. Karimi, Ali, Ramin Toosi, and Mohammad Ali Akhaee. "Soccer Event Detection Using Deep
    Learning." arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.04331 (2021).
97. Suzuki, Genki, Sho Takahashi, Takahiro Ogawa, and Miki Haseyama. "Team Tactics Estimation
    in Soccer Videos Based on a Deep Extreme Learning Machine and Characteristics of the
    Tactics." IEEE Access 7 (2019): 153238-153248.
98. Suzuki, Genki, Sho Takahashi, Takahiro Ogawa, and Miki Haseyama. "Decision level fusion-
    based team tactics estimation in soccer videos." In 2016 IEEE 5th Global Conference on
    Consumer Electronics, pp. 1-2. IEEE, 2016.
99. Ohnuki, Shuhei, Sho Takahashi, Takahiro Ogawa, and Miki Haseyama. "Soccer video
    segmentation based on team tactics estimation method." In Proc. IWAIT, pp. 692-695. 2013.
100.          Clemente, Filipe Manuel, Micael Santos Couceiro, Fernando Manuel Lourenço Martins,
    Rui Sousa Mendes, and António José Figueiredo. "Soccer team’s tactical behaviour: Measuring
    territorial domain." Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, Part P: Journal of
    Sports Engineering and Technology 229, no. 1 (2015): 58-66.
101.         Hassan, Amr, Abdel-Rahman Akl, Ibrahim Hassan, and Caroline Sunderland. "Predicting
    Wins, Losses and Attributes’ Sensitivities in the Soccer World Cup 2018 Using Neural Network
    Analysis." Sensors 20, no. 11 (2020): 3213.
102.         Niu, Zhenxing, Xinbo Gao, and Qi Tian. "Tactic analysis based on real-world ball
    trajectory in soccer video." Pattern Recognition 45, no. 5 (2012): 1937-1947.
103.         Wu, Yingcai, Xiao Xie, Jiachen Wang, Dazhen Deng, Hongye Liang, Hui Zhang, Shoubin
    Cheng, and Wei Chen. "Forvizor: Visualizing spatio-temporal team formations in soccer." IEEE
    transactions on visualization and computer graphics 25, no. 1 (2018): 65-75.
104.         Suzuki, Genki, Sho Takahashi, Takahiro Ogawa, and Miki Haseyama. "Team tactics
    estimation in soccer videos via deep extreme learning machine based on players formation."
    In 2018 IEEE 7th Global Conference on Consumer Electronics (GCCE), pp. 116-117. IEEE,
    2018.
105.         Wang, Bin, Wei Shen, FanSheng Chen, and Dan Zeng. "Football match intelligent editing
    system based on deep learning." TIIS 13, no. 10 (2019): 5130-5143.
106.         Zawbaa, Hossam M., Nashwa El-Bendary, Aboul Ella Hassanien, and Tai-hoon Kim.
    "Event detection based approach for soccer video summarization using machine
    learning." International Journal of Multimedia and Ubiquitous Engineering 7, no. 2 (2012): 63-80.
107.         Kolekar, Maheshkumar H., and Somnath Sengupta. "Bayesian network-based
    customized highlight generation for broadcast soccer videos." IEEE Transactions on
    Broadcasting 61, no. 2 (2015): 195-209.
108.         Li, Jianguo, Tao Wang, Wei Hu, Mingliang Sun, and Yimin Zhang. "Soccer highlight
    detection using two-dependence bayesian network." In 2006 IEEE International Conference on
    Multimedia and Expo, pp. 1625-1628. IEEE, 2006.
109.         Foysal, MdFerdouse Ahmed, Mohammad Shakirul Islam, AsifKarim, and NafisNeehal.
    "Shot-Net: A convolutional neural network for classifying different cricket shots." In International
    Conference on Recent Trends in Image Processing and Pattern Recognition, pp. 111-120.
    Springer, Singapore, 2018.
110.         Khan, Muhammad Zeeshan, Muhammad A. Hassan, AmmarahFarooq, and Muhammad
    UsmanGhanni Khan. "Deep CNN Based Data-Driven Recognition of Cricket Batting Shots."
    In 2018 International Conference on Applied and Engineering Mathematics (ICAEM), pp. 67-71.
    IEEE, 2018.
111.         Khan, Aftab, James Nicholson, and Thomas Plötz. "Activity recognition for quality
    assessment of batting shots in cricket using a hierarchical representation." Proceedings of the
    ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies 1, no. 3 (2017): 1-31.
112.         Sen, Anik, Kaushik Deb, Pranab Kumar Dhar, and Takeshi Koshiba. "CricShotClassify:
    An Approach to Classifying Batting Shots from Cricket Videos Using a Convolutional Neural
    Network and Gated Recurrent Unit." Sensors 21, no. 8 (2021): 2846.
113.         Gürpınar-Morgan, Will, Daniel Dinsdale, Joe Gallagher, Aditya Cherukumudi, and Patrick
    Lucey. "You Cannot Do That Ben Stokes: Dynamically Predicting Shot Type in Cricket Using a
    Personalized Deep Neural Network." arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.01952 (2021).
114.         Bandara, Ishara, and Boris Bačić. "Strokes Classification in Cricket Batting Videos."
    In 2020 5th International Conference on Innovative Technologies in Intelligent Systems and
    Industrial Applications (CITISIA), pp. 1-6. IEEE, 2020.
115.         Moodley, Tevin, and Dustin van der Haar. "Scene Recognition Using AlexNet to
    Recognize Significant Events Within Cricket Game Footage." In International Conference on
    Computer Vision and Graphics, pp. 98-109. Springer, Cham, 2020.
116.         Gupta, Arpan, and Sakthi Balan Muthiah. "Viewpoint constrained and unconstrained
    cricket stroke localization from untrimmed videos." Image and Vision Computing (2020): 103944.
117.         Al Islam, MdNafee, Tanzil Bin Hassan, and SiamulKarim Khan. "A CNN-based approach
    to classify cricket bowlers based on their bowling actions." In 2019 IEEE International Conference
    on Signal Processing, Information, Communication & Systems (SPICSCON), pp. 130-134. IEEE,
    2019.
118.         Muthuswamy, Shanthi, and Sarah S. Lam. "Bowler performance prediction for one-day
    international cricket using neural networks." In IIE Annual Conference. Proceedings, p. 1391.
    Institute of Industrial and Systems Engineers (IISE), 2008.
119.         Bhattacharjee, Dibyojyoti, and Darshan G. Pahinkar. "Analysis of performance of bowlers
    using combined bowling rate." International Journal of Sports Science and Engineering 6, no. 3
    (2012): 1750-9823.
120.         Rahman, Rafeed, Mehfuz A. Rahman, Md Saiful Islam, and Mahady Hasan. "DeepGrip:
    Cricket Bowling Delivery Detection with Superior CNN Architectures." In 2021 6th International
    Conference on Inventive Computation Technologies (ICICT), pp. 630-636. IEEE, 2021.
121.         Lemmer, Hermanus H. "The combined bowling rate as a measure of bowling
    performance in cricket." South African Journal for Research in Sport, Physical Education and
    Recreation 24, no. 2 (2002): 37-44.
122.         Mukherjee, Satyam. "Quantifying individual performance in Cricket—A network analysis
    of Batsmen and Bowlers." Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications 393 (2014): 624-
    637.
123.         Velammal, B. L., and P. Anandha Kumar. "An Efficient Ball Detection Framework for
    Cricket." International Journal of Computer Science Issues (IJCSI) 7, no. 3 (2010): 30.
124.         Kumar, Rohit, D. Santhadevi, and Janet Barnabas. "Outcome Classification in Cricket
    Using Deep Learning." In 2019 IEEE International Conference on Cloud Computing in Emerging
    Markets (CCEM), pp. 55-58. IEEE, 2019.
125.         Shukla, Pushkar, HemantSadana, ApaarBansal, Deepak Verma, Carlos Elmadjian,
    Balasubramanian Raman, and Matthew Turk. "Automatic cricket highlight generation using event-
    driven and excitement-based features." In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer
    Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops, pp. 1800-1808. 2018.
126.         Kowsher, Md, M. AshrafulAlam, MdJashimUddin, Faisal Ahmed, MdWaliUllah, and
    MdRafiqul Islam. "Detecting Third Umpire Decisions & Automated Scoring System of Cricket."
    In 2019 International Conference on Computer, Communication, Chemical, Materials and
    Electronic Engineering (IC4ME2), pp. 1-8. IEEE, 2019.
127.         Ravi, Aravind, HarshwinVenugopal, Sruthy Paul, and Hamid R. Tizhoosh. "A Dataset and
    Preliminary Results for Umpire Pose Detection Using SVM Classification of Deep Features."
    In 2018 IEEE Symposium Series on Computational Intelligence (SSCI), pp. 1396-1402. IEEE,
    2018.
128.         Nelikanti, Arjun, G. Venkata Rami Reddy, and G. Karuna. "An Optimization Based deep
    LSTM Predictive Analysis for Decision Making in Cricket." In Innovative Data Communication
    Technologies and Application, pp. 721-737. Springer, Singapore, 2021.
129.         Kapadiya, Chetan, Ankit Shah, KinjalAdhvaryu, and Pratik Barot. "Intelligent Cricket
    Team Selection by Predicting Individual Players’ Performance using Efficient Machine Learning
    Technique."
130.         Iyer, Subramanian Rama, and Ramesh Sharda. "Prediction of athletes performance
    using neural networks: An application in cricket team selection." Expert Systems with
    Applications 36, no. 3 (2009): 5510-5522.
131.         Jhanwar, MadanGopal, and VikramPudi. "Predicting the Outcome of ODI Cricket
    Matches: A Team Composition Based Approach." In MLSA@ PKDD/ECML. 2016.
132.         Pathak, Neeraj, and Hardik Wadhwa. "Applications of modern classification techniques to
    predict the outcome of ODI cricket." Procedia Computer Science 87 (2016): 55-60.
133.         Alaka, Souridas, Rishikesh Sreekumar, and Hrithwik Shalu. "Efficient Feature
    Representations for Cricket Data Analysis using Deep Learning based Multi-Modal Fusion
    Model." arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.07139 (2021).
134.         Goel, Rajesh, Jerryl Davis, Amit Bhatia, Pulkit Malhotra, Harsh Bhardwaj, Vikas Hooda,
    and Ankit Goel. "Dynamic cricket match outcome prediction." Journal of Sports Analytics Preprint:
    1-12.
135.         Karthik, K., Gokul S. Krishnan, Shashank Shetty, Sanjay S. Bankapur, Ranjit P. Kolkar,
    T. S. Ashwin, and Manjunath K. Vanahalli. "Analysis and Prediction of Fantasy Cricket Contest
    Winners Using Machine Learning Techniques." In Evolution in Computational Intelligence, pp.
    443-453. Springer, Singapore, 2021.
136.         Shah, Parag. "New performance measure in Cricket." ISOR Journal of Sports and
    Physical Education 4, no. 3 (2017): 28-30.
137.         Shingrakhia, Hansa, and Hetal Patel. "SGRNN-AM and HRF-DBN: a hybrid machine
    learning model for cricket video summarization." The Visual Computer (2021): 1-17.
138.         Guntuboina, Chakradhar, Aditya Porwal, Preet Jain, and Hansa Shingrakhia. "Deep
    Learning Based Automated Sports Video Summarization using YOLO." Electronic Letters on
    Computer Vision and Image Analysis 20, no. 1 (2021): 99-116.
139.         Owens, N. E. I. L., C. Harris, and C. Stennett. "Hawk-eye tennis system." In 2003
    International Conference on Visual Information Engineering VIE 2003, pp. 182-185. IET, 2003.
140.         Wu, Guodong. "Monitoring System of Key Technical Features of Male Tennis Players
    Based on Internet of Things Security Technology." Wireless Communications and Mobile
    Computing 2021 (2021).
141.         Connaghan, Damien, Philip Kelly, and Noel E. O'Connor. "Game, shot and match: Event-
    based indexing of tennis." In 2011 9th International Workshop on Content-Based Multimedia
    Indexing (CBMI), pp. 97-102. IEEE, 2011.
142.         Giles, Brandon, Stephanie Kovalchik, and Machar Reid. "A machine learning approach
    for automatic detection and classification of changes of direction from player tracking data in
    professional tennis." Journal of Sports Sciences 38, no. 1 (2020): 106-113.
143.         Zhou, Xiangzeng, Lei Xie, Qiang Huang, Stephen J. Cox, and Yanning Zhang. "Tennis
    ball tracking using a two-layered data association approach." IEEE Transactions on
    Multimedia 17, no. 2 (2014): 145-156.
144.         Reno, Vito, Nicola Mosca, Roberto Marani, Massimiliano Nitti, Tiziana D'Orazio, and
    Ettore Stella. "Convolutional neural networks based ball detection in tennis games."
    In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops,
    pp. 1758-1764. 2018.
145.         Archana, M., and M. Kalaisevi Geetha. "Object detection and tracking based on trajectory
    in broadcast tennis video." Procedia Computer Science 58 (2015): 225-232.
146.         Polk, Tom, Jing Yang, Yueqi Hu, and Ye Zhao. "Tennivis: Visualization for tennis match
    analysis." IEEE transactions on visualization and computer graphics 20, no. 12 (2014): 2339-
    2348.
147.         Kelly, Philip, Ciarán Ó Conaire, David Monaghan, JogileKuklyte, Damien Connaghan,
    Juan Diego Pérez-MoneoAgapito, and PetrosDaras. "Performance analysis and visualisation in
    tennis using a low-cost camera network." (2010).
148.         Fernando, Tharindu, Simon Denman, SridhaSridharan, and Clinton Fookes. "Memory
    augmented deep generative models for forecasting the next shot location in tennis." IEEE
    Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering (2019).
149.         Pingali, Gopal, AgataOpalach, Yves Jean, and Ingrid Carlbom. "Visualization of sports
    using motion trajectories: providing insights into performance, style, and strategy." In Proceedings
    Visualization, 2001. VIS'01., pp. 75-544. IEEE, 2001.
150.         Pingali, GopalSarma, AgataOpalach, Yves D. Jean, and Ingrid B. Carlbom. "Instantly
    indexed multimedia databases of real world events." IEEE transactions on multimedia 4, no. 2
    (2002): 269-282.
151.         Cai, Jiaxin, Junlin Hu, Xin Tang, Tzu-Yi Hung, and Yap-Peng Tan. "Deep Historical Long
    Short-Term Memorys for Action Recognition." Neurocomputing (2020).
152.         Mora, Silvia Vinyes, and William J. Knottenbelt. "Deep learning for domain-specific action
    recognition in tennis." In 2017 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
    Workshops (CVPRW), pp. 170-178. IEEE, 2017.
153.         Ning, Bai, and Liu Na. "Deep Spatial/temporal-level feature engineering for Tennis-based
    action recognition." Future Generation Computer Systems 125 (2021): 188-193.
154.         Polk, Tom, DominikJäckle, Johannes Häußler, and Jing Yang. "CourtTime: Generating
    actionable insights into tennis matches using visual analytics." IEEE Transactions on
    Visualization and Computer Graphics 26, no. 1 (2019): 397-406.
155.         Zhu, Guangyu, Qingming Huang, Changsheng Xu, Liyuan Xing, Wen Gao, and Hongxun
    Yao. "Human behavior analysis for highlight ranking in broadcast racket sports video." IEEE
    Transactions on Multimedia 9, no. 6 (2007): 1167-1182.
156.         Wei, Xinyu, Patrick Lucey, Stuart Morgan, and SridhaSridharan. "Forecasting the next
    shot location in tennis using fine-grained spatiotemporal tracking data." IEEE Transactions on
    Knowledge and Data Engineering 28, no. 11 (2016): 2988-2997.
157.         Ma, Kevin. "A Real Time Artificial Intelligent System for Tennis Swing Classification."
    In 2021 IEEE 19th World Symposium on Applied Machine Intelligence and Informatics (SAMI),
    pp. 000021-000026. IEEE, 2021.
158.         Vales-Alonso, Javier, David Chaves-Diéguez, Pablo López-Matencio, Juan J. Alcaraz,
    Francisco J. Parrado-Garcia, and F. Javier Gonzalez-Castano. "SAETA: A smart coaching
    assistant for professional volleyball training." IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and
    Cybernetics: Systems 45, no. 8 (2015): 1138-1150.
159.         Kautz, Thomas, Benjamin H. Groh, Julius Hannink, Ulf Jensen, HolgerStrubberg, and
    Bjoern M. Eskofier. "Activity recognition in beach volleyball using a Deep Convolutional Neural
    Network." Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery 31, no. 6 (2017): 1678-1705.
160.         Ibrahim, Mostafa S., SrikanthMuralidharan, Zhiwei Deng, ArashVahdat, and Greg Mori.
    "A hierarchical deep temporal model for group activity recognition." In Proceedings of the IEEE
    Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 1971-1980. 2016.
161.         Van Haaren, Jan, Horesh Ben Shitrit, Jesse Davis, and Pascal Fua. "Analyzing volleyball
    match data from the 2014 World Championships using machine learning techniques."
    In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and
    Data Mining, pp. 627-634. 2016.
162.         Wenninger, Sebastian, Daniel Link, and Martin Lames. "Performance of machine learning
    models in application to beach volleyball data." International Journal of Computer Science in
    Sport 19, no. 1 (2020): 24-36.
163.         Haider, Fasih, FahimSalim, VahidNaghashi, SenaBusraYengecTasdemir, IzemTengiz,
    Kubra Cengiz, Dees Postma et al. "Evaluation of dominant and non-dominant hand movements
    for volleyball action modelling." In Adjunct of the 2019 International Conference on Multimodal
    Interaction, pp. 1-6. 2019.
164.         Salim, Fahim A., Fasih Haider, Sena Busra Yengec Tasdemir, Vahid Naghashi, Izem
    Tengiz, K. Cengiz, D. B. W. Postma, and R. Van Delden. "Volleyball Action Modelling for
    Behavior Analysis and Interactive Multi-modal Feedback." In 15th International Summer
    Workshop on Multimodal Interfaces, p. 50. 2019.
165.         Jiang, Wei, Kai Zhao, and Xinlong Jin. "Diagnosis Model of Volleyball Skills and Tactics
    Based on Artificial Neural Network." Mobile Information Systems 2021 (2021).
166.         Wang, Yufan, Yuliang Zhao, Rosa HM Chan, and Wen J. Li. "Volleyball skill assessment
    using a single wearable micro inertial measurement unit at wrist." IEEE Access 6 (2018): 13758-
    13765.
167.         Zhang, Chuanchang, Huan Tang, and ZhigangDuan. "Time Series Analysis of Volleyball
    Spiking Posture Based on Quality-Guided Cyclic Neural Network." Journal of Visual
    Communication and Image Representation (2019): 102681.
168.         Thilakarathne, Haritha, Aiden Nibali, Zhen He, and Stuart Morgan. "Pose is all you need:
    The pose only group activity recognition system (POGARS)." arXiv preprint
    arXiv:2108.04186 (2021).
169.          Zhao, Kai, Wei Jiang, Xinlong Jin, and Xuming Xiao. "Artificial intelligence system based
    on the layout effect of both sides in volleyball matches." Journal of Intelligent & Fuzzy
    Systems Preprint (2021): 1-10.
170.          Tian, Yang. "Optimization of Volleyball Motion Estimation Algorithm Based on Machine
    Vision and Wearable Devices." Microprocessors and Microsystems (2020): 103750.
171.          Suda, Shuya, Yasutoshi Makino, and Hiroyuki Shinoda. "Prediction of Volleyball
    Trajectory Using Skeletal Motions of Setter Player." In Proceedings of the 10th Augmented
    Human International Conference 2019, pp. 1-8. 2019.
172.          Şah, Melike, and Cem Direkoğlu. "Review and evaluation of player detection methods in
    field sports." Multimedia Tools and Applications (2021): 1-25.
173.          Rangasamy, Keerthana, Muhammad Amir As’ari, NurAzminaRahmad, and
    NurulFathiahGhazali. "Hockey activity recognition using pre-trained deep learning model." ICT
    Express (2020).
174.          Sozykin, Konstantin, Stanislav Protasov, Adil Khan, Rasheed Hussain, and Jooyoung
    Lee. "Multi-label class-imbalanced action recognition in hockey videos via 3D convolutional
    neural networks." In 2018 19th IEEE/ACIS International Conference on Software Engineering,
    Artificial Intelligence, Networking and Parallel/Distributed Computing (SNPD), pp. 146-151. IEEE,
    2018.
175.          Fani, Mehrnaz, Helmut Neher, David A. Clausi, Alexander Wong, and John Zelek.
    "Hockey action recognition via integrated stacked hourglass network." In Proceedings of the IEEE
    Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops, pp. 29-37. 2017.
176.          Cai, Zixi, Helmut Neher, Kanav Vats, David A. Clausi, and John Zelek. "Temporal hockey
    action recognition via pose and optical flows." In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on
    Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops, pp. 0-0. 2019.
177.          Chan, Alvin, Martin D. Levine, and MehrsanJavan. "Player Identification in Hockey
    Broadcast Videos." Expert Systems with Applications 165 (2020): 113891.
178.          Carbonneau, Marc-André, Alexandre J. Raymond, Eric Granger, and Ghyslain Gagnon.
    "Real-time visual play-break detection in sport events using a context descriptor." In 2015 IEEE
    International Symposium on Circuits and Systems (ISCAS), pp. 2808-2811. IEEE, 2015.
179.          Wang, Heng, Muhammad MuneebUllah, Alexander Klaser, Ivan Laptev, and
    CordeliaSchmid. "Evaluation of local spatio-temporal features for action recognition." 2009.
180.          Um, Gi-Mun, Changeun Lee, Sangjoon Park, and Jeongil Seo. "Ice Hockey Player
    Tracking and Identification System Using Multi-camera video." In 2019 IEEE International
    Symposium on Broadband Multimedia Systems and Broadcasting (BMSB), pp. 1-4. IEEE, 2019.
181.          Guo, Tianxiao, Kuan Tao, Qingrui Hu, and YanfeiShen. "Detection of Ice Hockey Players
    and Teams via a Two-Phase Cascaded CNN Model." (2020).
182.          Liu, Guiliang, and Oliver Schulte. "Deep reinforcement learning in ice hockey for context-
    aware player evaluation." arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.11088 (2018).
183.          Vats, Kanav, Helmut Neher, David A. Clausi, and John Zelek. "Two-stream action
    recognition in ice hockey using player pose sequences and optical flows." In 2019 16th
    Conference on Computer and Robot Vision (CRV), pp. 181-188. IEEE, 2019.
184.          Vats, Kanav, Mehrnaz Fani, David A. Clausi, and John Zelek. "Puck localization and
    multi-task event recognition in broadcast hockey videos." In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
    Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 4567-4575. 2021.
185.          Tora, Moumita Roy, Jianhui Chen, and James J. Little. "Classification of puck possession
    events in ice hockey." In 2017 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition
    workshops (CVPRW), pp. 147-154. IEEE, 2017.
186.          Weeratunga, Kokum, AnujaDharmaratne, and Khoo Boon How. "Application of computer
    vision and vector space model for tactical movement classification in badminton." In Proceedings
    of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops, pp. 76-82.
    2017.
187.         Rahmad, N. A., and M. A. As’ari. "The new Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) local
    feature extractor for automated badminton action recognition on vision based data." In Journal of
    Physics: Conference Series, vol. 1529, no. 2, p. 022021. IOP Publishing, 2020.
188.         Steels, Tim, Ben Van Herbruggen, Jaron Fontaine, Toon De Pessemier, David Plets, and
    Eli De Poorter. "Badminton Activity Recognition Using Accelerometer Data." Sensors 20, no. 17
    (2020): 4685.
189.         bintiRahmad, NurAzmina, NurAnisJasminbintiSufri, Muhammad Amir bin As' ari, and
    AizreenabintiAzaman. "Recognition of Badminton Action Using Convolutional Neural
    Network." Indonesian Journal of Electrical Engineering and Informatics (IJEEI) 7, no. 4 (2019):
    750-756.
190.         Ghosh, Indrajeet, Sreenivasan Ramasamy Ramamurthy, and Nirmalya Roy.
    "StanceScorer: A Data Driven Approach to Score Badminton Player." In 2020 IEEE International
    Conference on Pervasive Computing and Communications Workshops (PerCom Workshops), pp.
    1-6. IEEE, 2020.
191.         Cao, Zhiguang, Tingbo Liao, Wen Song, Zhenghua Chen, and Chongshou Li. "Detecting
    the shuttlecock for a badminton robot: A YOLO based approach." Expert Systems with
    Applications 164 (2020): 113833.
192.         Chen, Wei, Tingbo Liao, Zhihang Li, Haozhi Lin, Hong Xue, Le Zhang, Jing Guo, and
    Zhiguang Cao. "Using FTOC to track shuttlecock for the badminton robot." Neurocomputing 334
    (2019): 182-196.
193.         Rahmad, Nur Azmina, Nur Anis Jasmin Sufri, Nurul Hamizah Muzamil, and Muhammad
    Amir As’ari. "Badminton player detection using faster region convolutional neural
    network." Indonesian Journal of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science 14, no. 3 (2019):
    1330-1335.
194.         Hou, Jianbin, and Baoguo Li. "Swimming target detection and tracking technology in
    video image processing." Microprocessors and Microsystems 80 (2020): 103535.
195.         Cao, Yu. "Fast swimming motion image segmentation method based on symmetric
    difference algorithm." Microprocessors and Microsystems 80: 103541.
196.         Hegazy, Habiba, Mohamed Abdelsalam, Moustafa Hussien, Seif Elmosalamy, Yomna MI
    Hassan, Ayman M. Nabil, and Ayman Atia. "IPingPong: A Real-time Performance Analyzer
    System for Table Tennis Stroke’s Movements." Procedia Computer Science 175 (2020): 80-87.
197.         Baclig, Maria Martine, Noah Ergezinger, Qipei Mei, Mustafa Gül, Samer Adeeb, and
    Lindsey Westover. "A Deep Learning and Computer Vision Based Multi-Player Tracker for
    Squash." Applied Sciences 10, no. 24 (2020): 8793.
198.         Brumann, Christopher, Markus Kukuk, and Claus Reinsberger. "Evaluation of Open-
    Source and Pre-Trained Deep Convolutional Neural Networks Suitable for Player Detection and
    Motion Analysis in Squash." Sensors 21, no. 13 (2021): 4550.
199.         Wang, Shaobo, Yuan Xu, Yanghao Zheng, Mingcheng Zhu, Haodong Yao, and Zhiyong
    Xiao. "Tracking a golf ball with high-speed stereo vision system." IEEE Transactions on
    Instrumentation and Measurement 68, no. 8 (2018): 2742-2754.
200.         Zhi-chao, Cao, and Lingling Zhang. "Key pose recognition toward sports scene using
    deeply-learned model." Journal of Visual Communication and Image Representation 63 (2019):
    102571.
201.         Liu, Hengyue, and BirBhanu. "Pose-Guided R-CNN for Jersey Number Recognition in
    Sports." In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
    Workshops, pp. 0-0. 2019.
202.         Pobar, Miran, and Marina Ivašić-Kos. "Detection of the leading player in handball scenes
    using Mask R-CNN and STIPS." In Eleventh International Conference on Machine Vision (ICMV
    2018), vol. 11041, p. 110411V. International Society for Optics and Photonics, 2019.
203.         Van Zandycke, Gabriel, and Christophe De Vleeschouwer. "Real-time CNN-based
    Segmentation Architecture for Ball Detection in a Single View Setup." In Proceedings
    Proceedings of the 2nd International Workshop on Multimedia Content Analysis in Sports, pp. 51-
    58. 2019.
204.         Burić, Matija, Miran Pobar, and Marina Ivašić-Kos. "Object detection in sports videos."
    In 2018 41st International Convention on Information and Communication Technology,
    Electronics and Microelectronics (MIPRO), pp. 1034-1039. IEEE, 2018.
205.         Burić, Matija, Miran Pobar, and Marina Ivašić-Kos. "Adapting YOLO network for ball and
    player detection." In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Pattern Recognition
    Applications and Methods (ICPRAM 2019), pp. 845-851. 2019.
206.         Pobar, Miran, and Marina Ivasic-Kos. "Active Player Detection in Handball Scenes Based
    on Activity Measures." Sensors 20, no. 5 (2020): 1475.
207.         Komorowski, Jacek, Grzegorz Kurzejamski, and Grzegorz Sarwas. "Deepball: Deep
    neural-network ball detector." arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.07304 (2019).
208.         Liu, Wei. "Beach sports image detection based on heterogeneous multi-processor and
    convolutional neural network." Microprocessors and Microsystems 82 (2021): 103910.
209.         Zhang, Ruiheng, Lingxiang Wu, Yukun Yang, Wanneng Wu, Yueqiang Chen, and Min
    Xu. "Multi-camera multi-player tracking with deep player identification in sports video." Pattern
    Recognition 102 (2020): 107260.
210.         Karungaru, Stephen, Kenji Matsuura, Hiroki Tanioka, Tomohito Wada, and Naka Gotoda.
    "Ground Sports Strategy Formulation and Assistance Technology Develpoment: Player Data
    Acquisition from Drone Videos." In 2019 8th International Conference on Industrial Technology
    and Management (ICITM), pp. 322-325. IEEE, 2019.
211.         Hui, Qiuli. "Motion video tracking technology in sports training based on Mean-Shift
    algorithm." The Journal of Supercomputing 75, no. 9 (2019): 6021-6037.
212.         Castro, Roberto López, and Diego Andrade Canosa. "Using Artificial Vision Techniques
    for Individual Player Tracking in Sport Events." In Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute
    Proceedings, vol. 21, no. 1, p. 21. 2019.
213.         Burić, Matija, Marina Ivašić-Kos, and MiranPobar. "Player Tracking in Sports Videos."
    In 19th IEEE International Conference on Computer and Information Technology (CIT 2019).
    2019.
214.         Moon, Sungwon, Jiwon Lee, Dowon Nam, Wonyoung Yoo, and Wonjun Kim. "A
    comparative study on preprocessing methods for object tracking in sports events." In 2018 20th
    International Conference on Advanced Communication Technology (ICACT), pp. 460-462. IEEE,
    2018.
215.         Xing, Junliang, Haizhou Ai, Liwei Liu, and Shihong Lao. "Multiple player tracking in sports
    video: A dual-mode two-way bayesian inference approach with progressive observation
    modeling." (2011).
216.         Liang, Qiaokang, Wanneng Wu, Yukun Yang, Ruiheng Zhang, Yu Peng, and Min Xu.
    "Multi-Player Tracking for Multi-View Sports Videos with Improved K-Shortest Path
    Algorithm." Applied Sciences 10, no. 3 (2020): 864.
217.         Lu, Wei-Lwun, Jo-Anne Ting, James J. Little, and Kevin P. Murphy. "Learning to track
    and identify players from broadcast sports videos." IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and
    machine intelligence 35, no. 7 (2013): 1704-1716.
218.         Huang, Yu-Chuan, I-No Liao, Ching-Hsuan Chen, Tsì-Uí İk, and Wen-Chih Peng.
    "TrackNet: A Deep Learning Network for Tracking High-speed and Tiny Objects in Sports
    Applications." In 2019 16th IEEE International Conference on Advanced Video and Signal Based
    Surveillance (AVSS), pp. 1-8. IEEE, 2019.
219.         Xing, Junliang, Haizhou Ai, Liwei Liu, and Shihong Lao. "Multiple player tracking in sports
    video: A dual-mode two-way bayesian inference approach with progressive observation
    modeling." IEEE Transactions on image Processing 20, no. 6 (2010): 1652-1667.
220.         Tan, Shaoqing, and Ruoyu Yang. "Learning similarity: Feature-aligning network for few-
    shot action recognition." In 2019 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN), pp.
    1-7. IEEE, 2019.
221.         Ullah, Amin, Jamil Ahmad, Khan Muhammad, Muhammad Sajjad, and Sung WookBaik.
    "Action recognition in video sequences using deep bi-directional LSTM with CNN features." IEEE
    Access 6 (2017): 1155-1166.
222.         Russo, Mohammad Ashraf, LaksonoKurnianggoro, and Kang-Hyun Jo. "Classification of
    sports videos with combination of deep learning models and transfer learning." In 2019
    International Conference on Electrical, Computer and Communication Engineering (ECCE), pp.
    1-5. IEEE, 2019.
223.         Santiago, Catarina B., Armando Sousa, Luís Paulo Reis, and Maria LuísaEstriga. "Real
    time colour based player tracking in indoor sports." In Computational Vision and Medical Image
    Processing, pp. 17-35. Springer, Dordrecht, 2011.
224.         Waltner, Georg, Thomas Mauthner, and Horst Bischof. "Indoor activity detection and
    recognition for sport games analysis." arXiv preprint arXiv:1404.6413 (2014).
225.         Soomro, Khurram, and Amir R. Zamir. "Action recognition in realistic sports videos."
    In Computer vision in sports, pp. 181-208. Springer, Cham, 2014.
226.         Xu, Ke, Xinghao Jiang, and Tanfeng Sun. "Two-stream dictionary learning architecture
    for action recognition." IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology 27, no.
    3 (2017): 567-576.
227.         Chaudhury, Subhajit, Daiki Kimura, PhongtharinVinayavekhin, AsimMunawar, Ryuki
    Tachibana, Koji Ito, Yuki Inaba, Minoru Matsumoto, ShujiKidokoro, and Hiroki Ozaki.
    "Unsupervised Temporal Feature Aggregation for Event Detection in Unstructured Sports
    Videos." In 2019 IEEE International Symposium on Multimedia (ISM), pp. 9-97. IEEE, 2019.
228.         Li, Yedong, Hongmei He, and Zhixin Zhang. "Human motion quality assessment toward
    sophisticated sports scenes based on deeply-learned 3D CNN model." Journal of Visual
    Communication and Image Representation 71 (2020): 102702.
229.         Chen, Hua-Tsung, Chien-Li Chou, Wei-Chin Tsai, Suh-Yin Lee, and Bao-Shuh P. Lin.
    "HMM-based ball hitting event exploration system for broadcast baseball video." Journal of Visual
    Communication and Image Representation 23, no. 5 (2012): 767-781.
230.         Punchihewa, Niroshan G., Go Yamako, Yuu Fukao, and Etsuo Chosa. "Identification of
    key events in baseball hitting using inertial measurement units." Journal of biomechanics 87
    (2019): 157-160.
231.         Kapela, Rafal, Aleksandra Świetlicka, Andrzej Rybarczyk, and Krzysztof Kolanowski.
    "Real-time event classification in field sport videos." Signal Processing: Image Communication 35
    (2015): 35-45.
232.         Maksai, Andrii, Xinchao Wang, and Pascal Fua. "What players do with the ball: A
    physically constrained interaction modeling." In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer
    vision and pattern recognition, pp. 972-981. 2016.
233.         Goud, P. Sri Harsha Vardhan, Y. Mohana Roopa, and B. Padmaja. "Player Performance
    Analysis in Sports: with Fusion of Machine Learning and Wearable Technology." In 2019 3rd
    International Conference on Computing Methodologies and Communication (ICCMC), pp. 600-
    603. IEEE, 2019.
234.         Park, Young Joon, Hyung Seok Kim, Donghwa Kim, Hankyu Lee, Seoung Bum Kim, and
    Pilsung Kang. "A deep learning-based sports player evaluation model based on game statistics
    and news articles." Knowledge-Based Systems 138 (2017): 15-26.
235.         Tejero-de-Pablos, Antonio, Yuta Nakashima, Tomokazu Sato, NaokazuYokoya, Marko
    Linna, and EsaRahtu. "Summarization of user-generated sports video by using deep action
    recognition features." IEEE Transactions on Multimedia 20, no. 8 (2018): 2000-2011.
236.         Javed, Ali, AunIrtaza, YasmeenKhaliq, Hafiz Malik, and Muhammad Tariq Mahmood.
    "Replay and key-events detection for sports video summarization using confined elliptical local
    ternary patterns and extreme learning machine." Applied Intelligence 49, no. 8 (2019): 2899-
    2917.
237.         Rafiq, Muhammad, Ghazala Rafiq, Rockson Agyeman, Seong-Il Jin, and Gyu Sang Choi.
    "Scene Classification for Sports Video Summarization Using Transfer Learning." Sensors 20, no.
    6 (2020): 1702.
238.         Khan, Abdullah Aman, Jie Shao, Waqar Ali, and SaifullahTumrani. "Content-Aware
    Summarization of Broadcast Sports Videos: An Audio–Visual Feature Extraction
    Approach." Neural Processing Letters (2020): 1-24.
239.         Krizhevsky, Alex, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E. Hinton. "Imagenet classification with
    deep convolutional neural networks." Advances in neural information processing systems 25
    (2012): 1097-1105.
240.         Krizhevsky, Alex, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E. Hinton. "ImageNet classification with
    deep convolutional neural networks." Communications of the ACM 60, no. 6 (2017): 84-90.
241.         Simonyan, Karen, and Andrew Zisserman. "Very deep convolutional networks for large-
    scale image recognition." arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.1556 (2014).
242.         Szegedy, Christian, Wei Liu, Yangqing Jia, Pierre Sermanet, Scott Reed, Dragomir
    Anguelov, Dumitru Erhan, Vincent Vanhoucke, and Andrew Rabinovich. "Going deeper with
    convolutions." In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
    pp. 1-9. 2015.
243.         He, Kaiming, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. "Deep residual learning for
    image recognition." In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
    recognition, pp. 770-778. 2016.
244.         Iandola, Forrest N., Song Han, Matthew W. Moskewicz, Khalid Ashraf, William J. Dally,
    and Kurt Keutzer. "SqueezeNet: AlexNet-level accuracy with 50x fewer parameters and< 0.5 MB
    model size." arXiv preprint arXiv:1602.07360 (2016).
245.         Howard, Andrew G., Menglong Zhu, Bo Chen, Dmitry Kalenichenko, Weijun Wang,
    Tobias Weyand, Marco Andreetto, and Hartwig Adam. "Mobilenets: Efficient convolutional neural
    networks for mobile vision applications." arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.04861 (2017).
246.         Murthy, Chinthakindi Balaram, Mohammad Farukh Hashmi, Neeraj Dhanraj Bokde, and
    Zong Woo Geem. "Investigations of object detection in images/videos using various deep
    learning techniques and embedded platforms—A comprehensive review." Applied sciences 10,
    no. 9 (2020): 3280.
247.         Zaremba, Wojciech, Ilya Sutskever, and Oriol Vinyals. "Recurrent neural network
    regularization." arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.2329 (2014).
248.         Jiang, X. W., T. H. Yan, J. J. Zhu, B. He, W. H. Li, H. P. Du, and S. S. Sun. "Densely
    connected deep extreme learning machine algorithm." Cognitive Computation 12, no. 5 (2020):
    979-990.
249.         Zhang, Yifu, Chunyu Wang, Xinggang Wang, Wenjun Zeng, and Wenyu Liu. "Fairmot: On
    the fairness of detection and re-identification in multiple object tracking." arXiv preprint
    arXiv:2004.01888 (2020).
250.         Wojke, Nicolai, Alex Bewley, and Dietrich Paulus. "Simple online and realtime tracking
    with a deep association metric." In 2017 IEEE international conference on image processing
    (ICIP), pp. 3645-3649. IEEE, 2017.
251.         Hu, Hou-Ning, Yung-Hsu Yang, Tobias Fischer, Trevor Darrell, Fisher Yu, and Min Sun.
    "Monocular Quasi-Dense 3D Object Tracking." arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.07351 (2021).
252.         Kim, Aleksandr, Aljoša Ošep, and Laura Leal-Taixé. "EagerMOT: 3D Multi-Object
    Tracking via Sensor Fusion." arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.14682 (2021).
253.         Chaabane, Mohamed, Peter Zhang, J. Ross Beveridge, and Stephen O'Hara. "Deft:
    Detection embeddings for tracking." arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.02267 (2021).
254.         Zeng, Fangao, Bin Dong, Tiancai Wang, Cheng Chen, Xiangyu Zhang, and Yichen Wei.
    "MOTR: End-to-End Multiple-Object Tracking with TRansformer." arXiv preprint
    arXiv:2105.03247 (2021).
255.         Wang, Zhongdao, Liang Zheng, Yixuan Liu, Yali Li, and Shengjin Wang. "Towards real-
    time multi-object tracking." In Computer Vision–ECCV 2020: 16th European Conference,
    Glasgow, UK, August 23–28, 2020, Proceedings, Part XI 16, pp. 107-122. Springer International
    Publishing, 2020.
256.         Xu, Yihong, Aljosa Osep, Yutong Ban, Radu Horaud, Laura Leal-Taixé, and Xavier
    Alameda-Pineda. "How to train your deep multi-object tracker." In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
    Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 6787-6796. 2020.
257.         Sun, Peize, Yi Jiang, Rufeng Zhang, Enze Xie, Jinkun Cao, Xinting Hu, Tao Kong,
    Zehuan Yuan, Changhu Wang, and Ping Luo. "Transtrack: Multiple-object tracking with
    transformer." arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.15460 (2020).
258.         Xu, Zhenbo, Wei Zhang, Xiao Tan, Wei Yang, Xiangbo Su, Yuchen Yuan, Hongwu
    Zhang, Shilei Wen, Errui Ding, and Liusheng Huang. "PointTrack++ for Effective Online Multi-
    Object Tracking and Segmentation." arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.01549 (2020).
259.         Gupta, Agrim, Justin Johnson, Li Fei-Fei, Silvio Savarese, and Alexandre Alahi. "Social
    gan: Socially acceptable trajectories with generative adversarial networks." In Proceedings of the
    IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 2255-2264. 2018.
260.         Phan-Minh, Tung, Elena Corina Grigore, Freddy A. Boulton, Oscar Beijbom, and Eric M.
    Wolff. "Covernet: Multimodal behavior prediction using trajectory sets." In Proceedings of the
    IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 14074-14083. 2020.
261.         Li, Xin, Xiaowen Ying, and Mooi Choo Chuah. "Grip: Graph-based interaction-aware
    trajectory prediction." In 2019 IEEE Intelligent Transportation Systems Conference (ITSC), pp.
    3960-3966. IEEE, 2019.
262.         Salzmann, Tim, Boris Ivanovic, Punarjay Chakravarty, and Marco Pavone. "Trajectron++:
    Dynamically-feasible trajectory forecasting with heterogeneous data." In Computer Vision–ECCV
    2020: 16th European Conference, Glasgow, UK, August 23–28, 2020, Proceedings, Part XVIII
    16, pp. 683-700. Springer International Publishing, 2020.
263.         Mohamed, Abduallah, Kun Qian, Mohamed Elhoseiny, and Christian Claudel. "Social-
    stgcnn: A social spatio-temporal graph convolutional neural network for human trajectory
    prediction." In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
    Recognition, pp. 14424-14432. 2020.
264.         Amirian, Javad, Bingqing Zhang, Francisco Valente Castro, Juan Jose Baldelomar, Jean-
    Bernard Hayet, and Julien Pettré. "Opentraj: Assessing prediction complexity in human
    trajectories datasets." In Proceedings of the Asian Conference on Computer Vision. 2020.
265.         Yu, Cunjun, Xiao Ma, Jiawei Ren, Haiyu Zhao, and Shuai Yi. "Spatio-temporal graph
    transformer networks for pedestrian trajectory prediction." In European Conference on Computer
    Vision, pp. 507-523. Springer, Cham, 2020.
266.         Wang, Chuhua, Yuchen Wang, Mingze Xu, and David J. Crandall. "Stepwise Goal-Driven
    Networks for Trajectory Prediction." arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.14107 (2021).
267.         Gu, Xiaofan, XinweiXue, and Feng Wang. "Fine-Grained Action Recognition on a Novel
    Basketball Dataset." In ICASSP 2020-2020 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech
    and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 2563-2567. IEEE, 2020.
268.         Voeikov, Roman, Nikolay Falaleev, and Ruslan Baikulov. "TTNet: Real-time temporal and
    spatial video analysis of table tennis." In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
    Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops, pp. 884-885. 2020.
269.         Giancola, Silvio, Mohieddine Amine, TarekDghaily, and Bernard Ghanem. "Soccernet: A
    scalable dataset for action spotting in soccer videos." In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on
    Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops, pp. 1711-1721. 2018.
270.         Conigliaro, Davide, Paolo Rota, Francesco Setti, Chiara Bassetti, Nicola Conci,
    NicuSebe, and Marco Cristani. "The s-hock dataset: Analyzing crowds at the stadium."
    In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 2039-
    2047. 2015.
271.         Karpathy, Andrej, George Toderici, SankethShetty, Thomas Leung, Rahul Sukthankar,
    and Li Fei-Fei. "Large-scale video classification with convolutional neural networks."
    In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 1725-
    1732. 2014.
272.         Pettersen, Svein Arne, Dag Johansen, Håvard Johansen, Vegard Berg-Johansen,
    Vamsidhar Reddy Gaddam, Asgeir Mortensen, RagnarLangseth, CarstenGriwodz,
    HåkonKvaleStensland, and PålHalvorsen. "Soccer video and player position dataset."
    In Proceedings of the 5th ACM Multimedia Systems Conference, pp. 18-23. 2014.
273.         Niebles, Juan Carlos, Chih-Wei Chen, and Li Fei-Fei. "Modeling temporal structure of
    decomposable motion segments for activity classification." In European conference on computer
    vision, pp. 392-405. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2010.
274.         D'Orazio, Tiziana, Marco Leo, Nicola Mosca, Paolo Spagnolo, and Pier Luigi Mazzeo. "A
    semi-automatic system for ground truth generation of soccer video sequences." In 2009 Sixth
    IEEE International Conference on Advanced Video and Signal Based Surveillance, pp. 559-564.
    IEEE, 2009.
275.         De Vleeschouwer, Christophe, Fan Chen, Damien Delannay, Christophe Parisot,
    Christophe Chaudy, Eric Martrou, and Andrea Cavallaro. "Distributed video acquisition and
    annotation for sport-event summarization." NEM summit 8 (2008).
276.         Zhang, Weichen, Zhiguang Liu, Liuyang Zhou, Howard Leung, and Antoni B. Chan.
    "Martial arts, dancing and sports dataset: A challenging stereo and multi-view dataset for 3d
    human pose estimation." Image and Vision Computing 61 (2017): 22-39.
277.         Feng, Na, Zikai Song, Junqing Yu, Yi-Ping Phoebe Chen, Yizhu Zhao, Yunfeng He, and
    Tao Guan. "SSET: a dataset for shot segmentation, event detection, player tracking in soccer
    videos." Multimedia Tools and Applications 79, no. 39 (2020): 28971-28992.
278.         Liang, Tianxiang. "Swimming sports action recognition based on wireless sensor and
    FPGA." Microprocessors and Microsystems (2020): 103433.
279.         Dou, Zi. "Research on Virtual Simulation of Basketball Technology 3D Animation Based
    on FPGA and Motion Capture System." Microprocessors and Microsystems (2020): 103679.
280.         Yin, Le, and Rui He. "Target state recognition of basketball players based on video image
    detection and FPGA." Microprocessors and Microsystems (2020): 103340.
281.         Bao, Hongshu, and Xiang Yao. "Dynamic 3D Image Simulation of Basketball Movement
    Based on Embedded System and Computer Vision." Microprocessors and Microsystems (2020):
    103655.
282.         Junjun, Gun. "Basketball action recognition based on FPGA and particle
    image." Microprocessors and Microsystems (2020): 103334.
283.         Avaya: Connected Sports Fans 2016 – Trends on the Evolution of Sports Fans Digital
    Experience with Live Events; June 2016
284.         H.-E Innovations, 2017. Hawk-Eye in Cricket.
    https://www.hawkeyeinnovations.com/sports/cricket
    Accessed 12 Feb 2017.
285.         H.-E Innovations, 2017d. Hawk-Eye Tennis System.
    https://www.hawkeyeinnovations.com/sports/tennis
    Accessed 12 Feb 2017
286.         H.-E Innovations, 2017b. Hawk-Eye Goal Line Technology.
    https://www.hawkeyeinnovations.com/products/ball-tracking/goal-line-technology
    Accessed 12 Feb 2017.
287.         STATS, 2017. STATS SportVU ®: Player Tracking and Predictive Analytics.
    https://www.statsperform.com/team-performance/football/optical-tracking/
    Accessed 12 Feb 2017.
288.         ChyronHego, 2017. Product Information Sheet TRACAB Optical Tracking.
    https://chyronhego.com/tracab-gen5-provides-demo-of-semi-automated-offside-technology-
    developments-to-the-football-world/
    Accessed 12th Feb 2017.
289.         Adesida, Yewande, Enrica Papi, and Alison H. McGregor. "Exploring the role of
    wearable technology in sport kinematics and kinetics: A systematic review." Sensors 19, no. 7
    (2019): 1597.
290.         Rana, Manju, and Vikas Mittal. "Wearable sensors for real-time kinematics analysis in
    sports: a review." IEEE Sensors Journal 21, no. 2 (2020): 1187-1207.
     291.         Naik, B.; Hashmi, M.F. YOLOv3-SORT detection and tracking player-ball in soccer
         sport. Journal of Electronic Imaging 2023, 32, 011003. doi:10.1117/1.JEI.32.1.011003.
     292.         Naik, B.; Hashmi, M.F.; Geem, Z.W.; Dhanraj, B.N. DeepPlayer-Track: Player and
         Referee Tracking with Jersey Color Recognition in Soccer. IEEE Access 2022, pp. 1–1.
         doi:10.1109/ACCESS.2022.3161441.


Abbreviations:

ANN            = Artificial Neural Network
AI             = Artificial intelligence
AUC            = Area under Curve
BEI-CNN         = Basketball Energy Image - Convolutional Neural Network
Bi-LSTM         = Bi-directional Long Short Term Memory
CNN            = Convolutional Neural Network
CPU            = Central Processing Unit
CUDA           = Compute Unified Device Architecture
DELM            = Deep Extreme Learning Machine
DeepMOT         = Deep Multi Object Tracking
Deep-SORT      = Simple Online Real Time Tracking with Deep Association
DRS            = Decision Review System
ELM            = Extreme Learning Machine
Faster-RCNN = Faster-Regional with Convolutional Neural Network
FPGA           = Field Programmable Gate Array
GAN            = Generative Adversarial Network
GDA            = Gaussian Discriminant Analysis
GPU            = Graphical Processing Unit
GRU-CNN         = Gated Recurrent Unit - Convolutional Neural Network
GTX             = Giga Texel Shader eXtreme
HOG            = Histogram of Oriented Gradients
HPN            = Hierarchical Policy Network
KNN            = K-Nearest Neighbor
LSTM           = Long Short Term Memory
Mask R-CNN = Mask Region-based Convolutional Neural Network
NBA        = National Basketball Association
NHL         = National Hockey League
R-CNN        = Region-based Convolutional Neural Network
ResNet       = Residual neural Network
RISC         = Reduced Instruction Set Computer
RNN          = Recurrent Neural Networks
SOTA       = State Of The Art
SSD         = Single-Shot Detector
SVM         = Support Vector Machine
VAR        = Video Assistant Referee
VGG          = Visual Geometry Group
YOLO         = You Only Look Once
