 Design of Recognition and Evaluation System for Table Tennis Players’

                     Motor Skills Based on Artificial Intelligence

     Zhuo-yong Shia, Ye-tao Jiaa, Ke-xin Zhangb, Ding-han Wanga, Long-meng Jia, and Yong Wua

        a School of Electronics and Information, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an 710129, China



              b School of Foreign Studies, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an 710129, China




Abstract：With the rapid development of electronic science and technology, the research on wearable

devices is constantly updated, but for now, it is not comprehensive for wearable devices to recognize and

analyze the movement of specific sports. Based on this, this paper improves wearable devices of table

tennis sport, and realizes the pattern recognition and evaluation of table tennis players’ motor skills

through artificial intelligence. Firstly, a device is designed to collect the movement information of table

tennis players and the actual movement data is processed. Secondly, a sliding window is made to divide

the collected motion data into a characteristic database of six table tennis benchmark movements.

Thirdly, motion features were constructed based on feature engineering, and motor skills were identified

for different models after dimensionality reduction. Finally, the hierarchical evaluation system of motor

skills is established with the loss functions of different evaluation indexes. The results show that in the

recognition of table tennis players' motor skills, the feature-based BP neural network proposed in this

paper has higher recognition accuracy and stronger generalization ability than the traditional

convolutional neural network.

Keywords: Wearable Device; Pattern Recognition; Artificial Intelligence; Feature Engineering;

Hierarchical Evaluation System


Introduction
     Sports have the functions of physical fitness and recreation, and they are indispensable in the

growing process of teenagers. More and more attention has been paid to the positive role of sports in

promoting health, which is followed by the continuous research on sports [1-5]. With the rapid

development of electronic information, intelligent wearable devices are increasingly widely applied in

sports [6-8]. Intelligent wearable devices can be used to monitor athletes’ physical signs and parameters,

and help us better do physical exercise [9-11].
     Relevant scholars’ researches on intelligent wearable devices mainly focus on the directions of low

power consumption, wear resistance, radiation, privacy, reliability and device lightweight, etc. In terms

of function, they mainly realize the calculation of motion characteristics or the estimation of exercise

calories consumption. Relevant scholars have also achieved a lot of achievements in their research on

the performance of various aspects of wearable devices. For example, Wu[12] et al. proposed that

wearable devices should design low-power system or apply energy harvesting technologies, in order to

minimize interpersonal interaction and enable wearables to run for a long time without changing

batteries or recharging. Chen[13] et al. introduced the idea of artificial integration, which attempted to

solve the discomfort caused by wearing many sensors in different parts of the body for healthcare

applications. All wearable Internet of Things (IoT) devices use wireless technology to transmit their

sensing data to another node, gateway or base station. This wireless transmission involves

radio-frequency radiation, which can have a negative impact on the user’s health. Dian[14] et al. solved

this safety problem by analyzing the standard limit of human exposure to radio-frequency

electromagnetic energy and the radiation level of CIoT antenna. Zhao[15] et al. proposed that smart

glasses often present information on a screen very close to people’s eyes, and long-term use may bring

side effects such as headache, dizziness and other discomfort. In addition, since the sensitive data

collected by smart wearable devices is easy to be stolen, the privacy protection of user data of wearable

devices is also very important. Lee[16] et al. showed the privacy risks caused by keystroke inference

attacks. RK[17] et al. proposed a broadcast user IoT model and put forward a healthcare facility or

user-authorized device in which users’ personal data is only shared with expected nodes. What’s more,

some special equipment reliability is also very important. UMAMAHESWARAN[18] et al. designed a

body temperature sensor, pulse monitoring sensor, Global Positioning System (GPS) tracker, the display

with an output values, communication service network supported by the IoT and battery for operating

the sensor. He set up preventative tools to notify relatives and doctors of sensor outliers. Due to the

portable nature of wearables, lightweight data is also important. Yoon[19] et al. proposed a new concept

of lightweight user interaction. They used ready-made ambient light sensors as technology substitutes

for user interfaces of smart wearable devices, and designed and modeled lightweight user interaction

according to typical uses of representative smart wearable devices.

     In the field of table tennis, the motor skills of table tennis players often rely on the coach’s

subjective evaluation of the corresponding motor skills, and this artificial evaluation depends very much
on the professional level of the coach. Therefore, an objective evaluation system is needed to eliminate

the subjective influence of manual evaluation, and the emergence of wearable devices makes it possible.

However, current wearable devices are more friendly to general sports, but the motion pattern

recognition and analysis of specific sports are not comprehensive [20]. It only measures and calculates

the steps and calories of the players, which cannot meet the needs of table tennis players. In table tennis,

the players are more concerned about the use of all the motor skills and the standardization of motor

skills in a table tennis game, which requires the development of a wearable device that can be used to

identify and analyze the motor skills of table tennis players.

     The use and the standardization of various motor skills of table tennis players come down to the

study of pattern recognition, which was first widely used in the field of aeronautics and astronautics to

monitor the flight status of electronic equipment in space. With the rapid development of pattern

recognition, there are more and more application in other fields. For example, in the field of biology, the

modeling of complex macromolecules [21], the identification of microbial characteristics [22], and the

screening of dissociated cells [23]; In computer applications, retrieval feature syntax [24], face

recognition system [25], character recognition system [26]; Recognition of acquired dermatosis in

medical field [27], application of brain-computer interface [28], cancer treatment [29]; In addition,

pattern recognition has also been applied in other fields, such as instrument fault recognition [30], image

processing [31], agricultural product quality supervision [32], etc. Pattern recognition is a process of

describing, identifying, classifying and explaining things or phenomena by processing and analyzing

various forms of information that represent things or phenomena. Current researches on pattern

recognition by relevant scholars include manipulator control, facial expression recognition, EEG

emotion recognition, pathogen recognition, pattern recognition of disease-resistant enzymes, etc. Lu[33]

et al. designed a manipulator control, which enables stroke patients to use pattern recognition to control

manipulator control activities for rehabilitation training of patients. Rivera[34] et al. divided the face into

several regions and adopted the local directional pattern to improve the accuracy of facial features and

expression recognition. Li[35] et al. used power spectrum analysis method to improve the performance

of emotion recognition by integrating EEG features with brain information transmission patterns.

Saijo[36] et al. demonstrated the dynamic and convergent evolution of pattern recognition specificity

and proposed the functional implications of pathogen recognition and disease resistance derived from

pattern recognition receptors. Seo[37] et al. designed a pattern recognition device based on optical
synapses, which can simulate the color and color mixing pattern recognition function of human visual

system when it is arranged in optical neural network. Boutrot[38] et al. proposed to detect plant insect

pests through pattern recognition receptors that produce disease-resistant enzymes in plants, and that this

technology has potential applications in emerging biotechnologies that improve crop broad-spectrum

and potentially long-lasting disease resistance.

     With the rise of artificial intelligence and the substantial improvement of computer computing

power, it is possible to use artificial intelligence technology to realize the use of various motor skills and

the standard degree of motor skills in the process of table tennis players. Based on the research demand

of wearable devices for recognition and analysis of table tennis players’ motor skills, this paper study the

use of various motor skills in table tennis and the standardization of motor skills though artificial

intelligence. This research is mainly divided into two parts: 1) The pattern recognition of various motor

skills of table tennis players. 2) Evaluation system of table tennis players’ motor skills. The key points

are as follows:

     1) The following elements are included in the pattern recognition of motor skills. Firstly, the

window function is used to segment the collected signals. Secondly, multi-dimensional features of table

tennis players are constructed based on feature engineering. Thirdly, the dimensionality of the features is

reduced based on PCA method. Finally, the athletes’ motor skills are identified and predicted based on

neural network model and support vector machine model respectively.

     2) In the evaluation system of motor skills, the first is establishing the motor skills evaluation

system based on multiple evaluation indexes. The second is calculating the evaluation index data of

collected data and then the distance between evaluation indexes at all levels and standard indexes. At

last, the motor skills of athletes are scored.

     The rest of this article is organized as follows. The first part is about the collection and

preprocessing of table tennis players’ sports data. It introduces the data acquisition system built in this

study and the contents of outlier removal, missing item interpolation and high-frequency noise filtering.

In the second part, the sliding window function is used to realize the data segmentation of table tennis

players’ movement data and the database establishment of the features of table tennis standard motor

skills. The third part is the recognition model of table tennis motor skills. Based on feature engineering,

multi-dimensional features are constructed and effective features are extracted, which are used to
classify and recognize table tennis movements. The fourth part is the establishment of table tennis motor

skill evaluation system including motor skill hierarchical evaluation system and the loss function of

different evaluation indexes. The fifth part is about the prediction results of the two classification models

and compares them with the traditional models. Finally, the sixth part is the summery of this paper.


1. Data collection and preprocessing

1.1 Design of data collection device

   The information collection device of table tennis movement is composed of power module,

gyroscope module, accelerometer module and CPU. The movement information collection system built

in this study is shown in Figure 1. The Power system, Gyro module and Accelerometer module of the

lower computer of table tennis movement information collection system are controlled by the CPU, and

communicate with the upper computer PC through the transmission system so as to realize the data

collection of the system.



                                                                                     Motion data
               Power system
                                                                                      collection

           Accelerometer module                                        PC
                                                  Transmission    information        Motion data
                                       CPU
                                                     system        receiving          analysis
             Velocity modules                                       terminal

                                                                                    Motion pattern
               Angle module
                                                                                     recognition

                     Lower machine                                          Upper computer



             Figure 1. Structure Diagram of Table Tennis Movement Information Collection System

     As Figure 2 shows, the hardware diagram of table tennis movement information collection system

is built according to Figure 1. In Figure 2, there are power supply modules, buck modules, master

control module, Bluetooth modules, posture module and display module are respectively included in

the table tennis movement information collection system. The power supply modules consist of two

batteries in series, which can provide 7.4V-8.4V voltage and power resources. The buck modules are

composed of 2596HV buck module, which can stabilize the input voltage to 5V, and stably supply

power to the master control system. The master control module is STM32F103ZET6, which can realize

the control and transmission of data and can be used to collect, display and send data. The Bluetooth

modules include HC-06 module, which can realize Bluetooth wireless communication and is used for
Bluetooth wireless transmission of data. The posture module is of MPU6050, which can realize the

perception of spatial posture and collect the corresponding posture information. The display module is

OLED module, which can realize the display of 128*64 resolution to show the collected posture

information.

                                                               Power
                                                              supply
                                                              modules
                                                  Bluetooth
                                                  modules




                                                                                              Posture
                                                                                              module



            Buck
           modules
                                                                                               Master
                                                                                               control
                                                                                               module
                                                                   Display
                                                                   modules



               Figure 2 Hardware Diagram of Table Tennis Movement Information Collection System

1.2 Data collection
     Players need to decide the direction, velocity, strength and placement of the return ball according to

their position and their own skills, and choose six kinds of motor skills in the process of return, that is,

forehand/backhand attack, forehand/backhand push and forehand/backhand chop. In this experiment,

triaxial acceleration data, triaxial angular velocity data and triaxial Angle data are collected during

motion. And the data is transmitted in the form of vector set, which is: < acc, ω , θ > , acc including

< acc _ xi , acc _ yi , acc _ zi >   ,   ω    including    < ω _ xi , ω _ yi , ω _ zi >   ,      θ       including

< θ _ xi , θ _ yi , θ _ zi > . The athletes’ movement data is collected through the table tennis movement

information collection system as shown in Figure 2, and the movement data collected is shown in Table

1.
                                          Table 1 List of collected data
                                 Sample Name                    Sample           Interval
                             Forehand Attack Data               100000            0.01s
                             Backhand Attack Data               100000           0.01 s
                              Forehand Push Data                100000           0.01 s
                              Backhand Push Data                100000           0.01 s
                              Forehand Chop Data                100000           0.01 s
                             Backhand Chop Data                 100000           0.01 s
     Taking the information collected within 10 seconds as an example, Figure 3 shows the collected

data of table tennis players in their sport process.




                    Figure 3 The Collected Data of Table Tennis Players in the Sport Process

1.3 Data cleaning

     After collecting the acceleration data of table tennis players in the process of movement through

the device in 1.1, there are some abnormal data in the data, so it is necessary to carry out data cleaning.

The data cleaning in this study mainly includes the removal of abnormal data and interpolation of

missing data.


1.3.1 The removal of abnormal data

     According to a group of n samples of sports data of table tennis players { x1 , x2 , …, xn } , the

first-order difference X i is calculated as shown in the equation.

                                        X i = xi +1 − xi ( i = 1, 2, …, n − 1)                         (1)


      X i is the first-order difference of motion data collection, which describes the changes of motion
data collection in a period of time. According to statistical knowledge, the changes should follow

normal distribution, so statistical characteristics of X i are collected for data removal.

      Firstly, the mathematical expectation EX of the first-order difference data X i of the motion sample

xi is calculated as shown in the equation.

                                                                     1 n −1
                                                      EX =              ∑X i
                                                                   n − 1 i =1
                                                                                                                          (2)



      Then, the standard deviation σ of the first-order difference data X i of the motion sample xi is

shown in the equation.

                                                          1 n −1
                                                             ∑     ( X i − EX )
                                                                                2
                                  =σ                                                                                      (3)
                                                        n − 1 i =1


       On the grounds of the principle of statistics, the first-order difference value X i of the collected

motion data sample xi should follow the normal distribution. According to the 3σ criterion, the data

within ( EX − 3σ , EX + 3σ ) should be retained as normal data, and the data outside ( EX − 3σ , EX + 3σ )

should be excluded as abnormal data. The abnormal data X i and the corresponding data xi +1 should be

removed, so as to realize the removal of abnormal data.


1.3.2 The interpolation of missing data

      After the removal of abnormal data in 1.3.1, the data in the deletion position needs to be repaired

by interpolation. In this study, the Newton interpolation method is used for recovery of the missing data,

and then to output the recovered data.

      For a group of data ( xi , f ( xi ))(i = 1 n) after the removal of outliers, xi represents the position of

the independent variable, and f ( xi ) is the function value of this position. Every xi is different, and the

missing data is denoted as x j , and the closest four data of x j are ( x0 , f ( x0 )) , ( x1 , f ( x1 )) , ( x2 , f ( x2 )) ,

( x3 , f ( x3 )) , which are used for data recovery.

      The first step is to define the first-order difference quotient between any two nodes as shown in

the equation.

                                                                    f ( x j ) − f ( xi )
                                                f [ xi , x j ] =                                                          (4)
                                                                        x j − xi
      In the equation, f ( x j ) is the function value of x j , and f [ xi , x j ] is the first-order difference quotient

of xi and x j .

      Secondly, the k-order difference quotient of k+1 non-identical nodes is defined as shown in the

equation.

                                                           f [ x1 , x2 , xk ] − f [ x0 , x1 , xk −1 ]
                                   f [ x0 , x1 , xk ] =                                                                  (5)
                                                                            xk − x0


      In the above equation, f ( x j ) is the function value of f ( x j ) , f [ x0 , x1 , xk −1 ] is the first-order

difference quotient of x0 , x1 , xk −1 .

      A difference quotient table is established for known data, and based on the difference quotient

table, the Newton interpolating polynomial N 3 ( x) is constructed at x j is shown in the following

equation.

                           f ( x0 ) + f [ x0 , x1 ]ω1 ( x) + f [ x0 , x1 , x2 ]ω2 ( x) + f [ x0 , x1 , x2 , x3 ]ω3 ( x)
                  N 3 ( x) =                                                                                              (6)


      There is ωi ( x) as the group of interpolation basis functions, which can be represented as follows.

                                                                     i
                                                       ω=
                                                        i ( x)     ∏ (x − x )
                                                                    k =1
                                                                                 k                                        (7)


      The interpolation remainder of the interpolation polynomial is shown in the next equation

                                                                     f ( n +1) (ζ )
                                                        R3 (n) =                                                          (8)
                                                                      (n + 1)!


      The above interpolation method can realize the recovery of missing data, and the function value of

recovered data is shown in the equation.

                                                           f ( x j ) ≈ N3 ( x j )                                         (9)


      A third-order difference quotient table was constructed based on the Newton interpolation method

to recover the function values of missing data, and to realize the data interpolation estimation where the

data is missing .

1.4 High-frequency noise filtration

      There is certain high-frequency noise in the collection process of table tennis movement data.

Based on this, the adaptive smoothing filtering method is adopted to process the data. In order to adapt

to the real-time performance of the signal, the filtering parameter is updated by increasing the threshold.
The new output value is defined as a linear combination of the current sampled value and the last

output value. The filter output is shown in the equation.

                                      (n) m X (n) + (1 − m)Y (n − 1)
                                     Y=                                                                  (10)


     In the above equation, Y (n) is the filtering output value of the filter. m is the filtering coefficient

between [0,1]. X (n) is the current sampled value. Y (n − 1) is the output value of the previous filtering.

     As can be seen from the above-mentioned equation, the filtering coefficient is the most important

parameter of the filter, which has a great influence on the filtering effect. In order to make the filter

design more reasonable, the time-variant features of the input signal are tracked and the filtering

parameters are updated during the output of the signal. The conditional threshold ∆a for determining

motion state is introduced, and the filtering coefficient m is judged and modified according to the

equations shown in the following equation.

                                            ∆ Y (n) − Y (n − 1)
                                            =
                                            
                                                 ∆a                                                   (11)
                                             m= 1 − ∆ k0
                                                        


     As shown in this equation, ∆ is the difference between this filtering output value and the output

value of the last filtering. ∆ a is the conditional threshold for determining the motion state, and k0 is the

default filtering parameter.

     The movement data collection device of table tennis players in 1.1 is used to collect the movement

data of table tennis players. The acceleration data in the x direction in the movement data of a group of

table tennis players is taken as an example for data preprocessing according to the methods in 1.3 and

1.4. The processing effect is shown in Figure 4.
                                    Figure 4 The Image of Data Preprocessing

     In Figure 4, the acceleration data in the X-axis direction during athletes’ movement is taken as an

example to verify the effect of data preprocessing. The sampling period is 0.01s, and 10 seconds of

acceleration data are collected for data preprocessing. It can be seen from the figure that the error

signals generated in the collection process can be well filtered after data preprocessing, which realizes

the expectation of data smoothing.

2. Establishment of standard motor skill models
     The benchmark motor skills of table tennis mainly include forehand attack, forehand push,

forehand chop, backhand attack, backhand push, backhand chop, etc. The six standard motor skill

models are established by collecting motor skill data of standard table tennis players. Based on these

models, the loss evaluation index of each motor skill is given to measure the loss of any part of motor

skills and standard motor skills.


2.1 The design of sliding window function

     The athletes’ movement information collected is transmitted in the way of data stream and cannot

be processed directly. Therefore, it is necessary to segment the collected data. The common solution in

data partition is to set a sliding window for processing the collected data. The data collected and

processed by windows can be divided into corresponding data segments according to the window

function, which provides the basis for the processing of the following feature engineering. Relevant

scholars have conducted many experimental studies on sliding window function and found that setting

the overlap rate of window function as 50% is a feasible method [39,40]. The window setting of the
window function will directly affect the recognition of movements. If the window setting is too large, it

may cause delay of movement recognition or training errors by recognizing various types of movements.

If the window function is too small, it may not recognize a whole movement, thus introducing

identification errors .

     After a comprehensive statistical analysis of the time required by each movement in table tennis, 2s

is selected as the default duration of a movement, that is, a sliding window. In combination with the

sampling frequency of the movement data in this study, which is 100Hz, the width of the sliding window

is set as 200 sampling points, and the coincidence rate of the sliding window is 50%, as shown in Figure

5. By setting the sliding window function, the length of different movement data can be consistent,

which is convenient for the statistics of movement data and provides significant help for the following

feature extraction and movement recognition.

                           Sliding  Sliding  Sliding                 Sliding
                          Window 1 Window 2 Window 3                Window n


                                                         …




                    Figure 5 The Movement Data Segmentation of Sliding Window Function

2.2 The design of motor skill activation function

      In the collected data of table tennis players, there can be a situation without table tennis

movements, which causes that the data divided through the sliding window does not represent the table

tennis motor skill, and this kind of data will trouble the motor skill recognition. Therefore, after

segmenting the sliding window function data, it is necessary to determine whether the players do motor

skills in this group of sliding windows. In order to solve this problem, the activation function of motor

skills is designed to judge whether a table tennis player completes a whole motor skill in a sliding

window.
      The information of acceleration and angular velocity in table tennis movements is used as the

marker to judge whether there is an effective motor skill in the corresponding sliding window. Common

binary classification models include logistic regression, naive Bayes, decision tree, support vector

machine, random forest, etc. Considering that table tennis motor skill activation function is not a set of

nonlinear and complex classification, the support vector machine model is thus selected for this

classification. The support vector machine model is supported by rigorous mathematical theory, and a

unique hyperplane can be determined by support vector to classify data. The model is of strong

interpretation and high stability.


     In the support vector machine, for a given binary data set D = {( xi , yi )}i =1 and yi {+1, −1} , if two
                                                                                   N




samples are linearly separable, that is, there is a hyperplane ω T x + b =0 separating two types of samples,

then for each sample, yi (ω T x + b ) > 0 . At the same time, considering that the model needs to have

certain error information and prevent model from overfitting, the optimization problem of both

empirical risk and structural risk is considered in the objective function. Therefore, the optimization

equation of this problem is simplified as shown in the equation.

                                                                n
                                                        2
                                             min ω          + C ∑ ξi                                      (12)
                                                               i =1


     In the above equation, ω is interval. ξi is slack variable. C is weight coefficient, which is used to

determine the weight between empirical risk and structural risk.

     The constraints of the optimization equation are shown in the equation.


                                                yi (ω T x + b ) ≥ 1 − ξi
                                               
                                          s.t.                                                           (13)
                                               
                                                        ξi > 0

     In the above equation, yi is sample label, ω is interval, and ξi is relaxation variable.

     The activation function of motor skills is determined by the optimization model as shown in the

equation in order to decide whether there are effective movements in the current sliding window. When

the motor skill activation function determines that the motor skill data in the sliding window is effective,

the subsequent method is adopted to identify the motor skill data. When the action skill activation

     Function determines that the movement data in the sliding window is not effective, this set of data

is skipped and the next data in the sliding window is carried out to design the movement activation

function.
2.3 The establishment of standard movements

     In table tennis, common benchmark motor skills mainly include forehand attack, forehand push,

forehand shop, backhand attack, backhand push, backhand chop, etc. The basic six motor skills are

shown in Figure 6. M1-M6 describes the six movements of forehand attack, backhand attack, forehand

push, backhand push, forehand chop and backhand chop respectively. The sampling period is 10ms, and

the standard period is 2000ms.




                           (a)M1                     (b)M2                    (c)M3




                           (d)M4                    (e)M5                     (f)M6


                            Figure 6   Six Benchmark Motor Skills in Table Tennis

     Various benchmark motor skills in Figure 4 are collected for 50 periods, and the feature database of

six motor skills is established, as shown in Figure 7.




                              Figure 7 The Feature Database of Six Motor Skills
3 The model of motor skill recognition
                Table tennis mainly includes forehand attack, forehand push, forehand chop, backhand attack,

backhand push, backhand chop. In this chapter, the model of table tennis motor skill recognition is

established based on two classification methods respectively, by which six benchmark movements of

table tennis are classified, so as to realize the recognition of table tennis players’ motor skills. The table

tennis player movement recognition and evaluation algorithm proposed in this paper is shown in Figure

8. In this algorithm, the multilevel index constructed based on feature engineering realizes the

classification and recognition of table tennis motor skills by using BP neural network and the

hierarchical evaluation index evaluation system based on feature database.


                                                                                                                                                                                           Motor skills
                                                                                                               …              Input                    MFE-BP
                                                                               Data dimensions




                                                                                                                                                                         Output         recognition results
                                                                                                                                                        neural
                                                                                                                      …




                                                                                                                                                       network
                                                                                                     …




                                                                                                                                                        model                             Confidence in
                                                                                                               …                                                                           recognition
                                                                                                     Number of samples
                                                                                                   Raw collection data
                                                                                                                                                              Data pre-processing
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Data
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Extraction of
                                Table tennis
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Dimensionality
                               movement skills                                                                                                                                                                  multidimensional
                                 evaluation
                                                                                                                                                                                                …                                                  Reduction
                                                                                                                                                                             Data                               motion features
                                                                                                                                                               …
                                                                                                                                 Data dimensions




                                                                                                                                                                         segmentation                …                                   …
                                                                                                                                                                                          …


                                                                                                                                                                                                    …

 Strength of
                Direction of
                movement
                                 Movement
                                                 Direction of
                                                 movement
                                                                Direction of
                                                                movement                                                                                                                              …                                                           …
 movement                        speed size
                                                                                                                                                                                                …     …
                                                                                                                                                                     …
                                                                                                                                                     …




                 strength                           speed          stance
                                                                                                                                                                                               …


                                                                                                                                                                                                          …




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      …
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              …
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              …
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              …
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             …
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   …
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   …
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   …
                                                                                                                                                                                               ……


                                                                                                                                                                                                          ……

  Synthetic        Each                                                                                                                                        …                                     …
                                                                                                                                                                                                     …
 acceleration   acceleration
                                 Synthesis
                                 speed size
                                                  Each speed
                                                   direction
                                                                  Posture
                                                                   angle                                                                                                                              …                                  …
  magnitude      direction                                                                                                                           Number of samples
                                                                                                           Feature database
                                                                                                                                                   Pre-processed data



                                                                                                                                                                                                          ...

                                                                                                        Scoring of                                                                                        ...
                                                                                                        evaluation                                   Recognition of
                                              …                                                       indicators at all                               motor skills                                        ...
                                                                                                           levels
                                                                                                                                                                                                   ...




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ...
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ...
                                                                                                                                                                                        ...




                                                                                                                                                                                                          ...
                       Evaluation indicator data
                                                                                                                                                                                                  BP neural network
                                                                                                                                                                                                    classification
                                                                                                                                                                                                     recognition

                                                                                                 Assessment of motor skills
                                                                                                    based on evaluation
                                                                                                        indicators




                         Figure 8 Schematic Diagram of Table Tennis Motor Skill Recognition and Evaluation Algorithm

3.1 Motion feature extraction based on feature engineering

                The collected players’ movement data is transmitted in the way of data stream, which cannot be

processed by feature engineering directly. Therefore, the sliding window function in 2.1 is used to

process the collected movement data, and then the movement features are extracted and collected based

on feature engineering.

                The collected movement information is shown in Table 1, including triaxial acceleration

< acc _ xi , acc _ yi , acc _ zi > , triaxial angular velocity data < ω _ xi , ω _ yi , ω _ zi > and triaxial posture

data < θ _ xi , θ _ yi , θ _ zi > . After preprocessing and segmentation of the collected data, movement

features are extracted respectively according to the acceleration, angular velocity and posture in the three
directions XYZ. Common features include mean value, variance and other features that reflect the

original collected data samples. However, the dimensional characteristic values changes due to different

some external physical quantities, and cannot reflect the original detailed features of the waveform,

which cuases certain difficulties to engineering applications. Therefore, we need to adopt more

dimensionless motion features to describe the motion information. It can also provide more

comprehensive motion features for motion pattern recognition. Based on this, the motion features

extracted in this paper are as follows.

     The extracted motion features including dimension include: the mean value of the motion

information in XYZ direction and the resultant direction, the variance of the motion information in XYZ

direction and the resultant direction, the maximum and minimum values of the motion information in

XYZ direction and the resultant direction, the peaking and valley values of the motion information in

XYZ direction and the resultant direction, the mean square value of the motion information in XYZ

direction and the resultant direction, the root mean square of the XYZ direction and the resultant

direction.

     Motion features without dimensional effects include: crest factor of motion information in XYZ

direction and resultant direction, pulse factor of motion information in XYZ direction and resultant

direction, margin factor of motion information in XYZ direction and resultant direction, kurtosis factor

of motion information in XYZ direction and resultant direction, waveform factor of motion information

in XYZ direction and resultant direction, and skewness of motion information in XYZ direction and

resultant direction.

     Taking a group of data after using the window as an example, the extracted features and

corresponding calculation methods are shown in Table 2.

                                   Table 2 The Extracted Motion Features of Players
    Feature Name                     Feature Explanation                           Calculation Equation

                                                                                              1 n
    Mean Value         The average level of the average factor in signal                 x=     ∑ xi
                                                                                              n i =1
                                                                                                            (14)


                                                                                           1 n
      Variance         The intensity of the factor fluctuation in signal        =σ x2        ∑ ( xi − x)2
                                                                                           n i =1
                                                                                                            (15)

     Maximum                                                                          max_ x = max( xi )    (16)
                         The maximum value of the factor in signal
      Value

   Minimum Value         The minimum value of the factor in signal                    min_ x = min( xi )    (17)

     Peak-valley                                                              =x pv max( xi ) − min( xi )   (18)
                        The range of fluctuation of a factor in signal
       Value
                                                                                         1 n 2
    Mean Square                      Signal energy                             ψ x2 =      ∑ xi
                                                                                         n i =1
                                                                                                                   (19)


     Root mean                                                                               1 n 2
      square
                             The effective value of signal                    xrms =           ∑ xi
                                                                                             n i =1
                                                                                                                   (20)


     Correlation      The degree of correlation between different                            cov( X , Y )
                                                                           ρ ( X ,Y ) =                            (21)
     Coefficient                      directions                                               σ x σ y

                                                                            max( xi ) − min( xi )
                                                                                                                   (22)
    Crest Factor       How extreme the peak is in the waveform                         1 n 2
                                                                                         ∑ xi
                                                                                       n i =1

                                                                            max( xi ) − min( xi )
                                                                                                                   (23)
    Pulse Factor       How extreme the peak is in the waveform                   1 n
                                                                                    ∑ xi
                                                                                 n i =1

                                                                            max( xi ) − min( xi )
                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                                   (24)
    Margin factor      How extreme the peak is in the waveform                    1 n           
                                                                                   ∑         xi 
                                                                                   n i =1       

                                                                                    1 n 4
                                                                                      ∑ xi
                                                                                    n i =1
   Kurtosis Factor           The flatness of the waveform                     xkr =                                (25)
                                                                                     1 n 2
                                                                                       ∑ xi
                                                                                     n i =1

                                                                                      1 n 2
     Waveform
                                                                                        ∑ xi
                                                                                      n i =1
                             The flatness of the waveform                                                          (26)
      Factor                                                                         1 n
                                                                                       ∑ xi
                                                                                     n i =1

                                                                                     1 n
                                                                                       ∑ ( xi − x)3
                                                                                     n i =1
     Skewness              How far a wave crest is off center             xsk =                              3
                                                                                                                   (27)
                                                                                  1 n         2
                                                                                                  2
                                                                                   ∑ ( xi − x) 
                                                                                   n
                                                                                   i=1         

                                                                                  1 n
                                                                                    ∑ ( xi − x)4
                                                                                  n i =1
      Kurtosis              The steepness of the waveform           =xku                                 2
                                                                                                             −3   (28)
                                                                             1 n         2
                                                                              ∑ ( xi − x) 
                                                                              n i =1      

     After data preprocessing, the data is segmented by sliding window function, and 180 features are

extracted for data classification.

3.2 Feature dimension reduction

     In the field of machine learning, overlearning directly has a negative influence on the

classification accuracy [41-43] and causes much more burden to the machine learning. Therefore, data

dimension reduction is necessary. Principal Component Analysis (PCA) is a typical unsupervised

dimension reduction algorithm, which can reduce multiple indicators into several principal components.

They are linearly independent and formed by linear combination of original variables, and can reflect

most useful information in original data [44,45]. There are 18 dimensions of motion feature data

extracted in this study so, it is necessary to adopt the principal component analysis model to reduce the

dimension of the extracted motion features so as to construct effective motion features.
     A matrix is formed based on the indexes and classification labels in the motion feature data, and

the mean value of each element of the matrix is subtracted to get the decentralized matrix, which is

shown in the formula.

                                     1 m               1 m                1 m      
                                x
                               11 m−    ∑   xi1 x 12 −
                                                        mi1
                                                           ∑ xi2   x 1n −   ∑ xin 
                                                                           mi1 
                              
                         =i 1 =                                   =

                                     1   m
                                                        1  m
                                                                           1 m      
                               x21 − ∑ xi1 x22 − ∑ xi 2  x2 n − ∑ xin 
                        X=
                         ij =        m i 1=            mi1       =        mi1                   (29)
                                                                               
                                                                                   
                               x 1                     1                  1
                                         m                 m                 m
                                                                                    
                        =
                              
                              
                                  m1
                                     m
                                        ∑   xi1
                                        i 1 =i 1
                                                 xm2  −
                                                        m
                                                           ∑ x i2  xmn
                                                                  =i 1
                                                                         −
                                                                           m
                                                                             ∑ x in
                                                                                    

     The covariance matrix was calculated according to the decentralized matrix of motion feature data,

as shown in the equation

                                                          1
                                               C=             XT X                                (30)
                                                         m −1


     The feature decomposition of the covariance matrix C is carried out to find the eigenvalues of the

covariance matrix λk and the corresponding eigenvectors vk , as shown in the formula.


                                                    Cvk = λk vk                                   (31)

     The contribution rate ci of the i-th component to the total component is defined as shown in the

equation.

                                                    λi
                                          ci
                                          =     p            ( i 1, 2,…, p )
                                                             =                                    (32)
                                               ∑λ
                                               k =1
                                                         k




                         ( i 1, 2,…, p ) is the eigenvalue of the covariance matrix R .
In the above equation, λi=

     The definition of cumulative contribution rate is shown in the next equation.

                                                i

                                               ∑λ        k
                                          C
                                          =i
                                               k =1
                                                 p           ( i 1, 2,…, p )
                                                             =                                    (33)
                                               ∑ λk
                                               k =1


     The cumulative contribution rate is successively accumulated. When the cumulative contribution

rate exceeds 95%, it shall be regarded as the principal component of motion features.

     In order to improve the accuracy of machine learning, principal component analysis is used to

reduce the dimension of the extracted motion features. The information retention rate of the principal

component is set as 95%, and there is the new feature with 23 dimensions. The new feature is
constructed as a linear combination of the original feature, as shown in the equation.

                                                       180
                                                Fn = ∑ ki  f i                                       (34)
                                                       i =1



     As shown in the equation, f i is the i-th original feature, ki is the weight coefficient of the i-th


original feature, Fn is the NTH feature constructed.

3.3 Motor skill recognition model

     Classification is one of the core problems in data mining, machine learning and pattern recognition

[46]. Common classification models include discriminant analysis, cluster analysis, support vector

machine and neural network. Support vector machine model is to find a hyperplane farthest away from

different categories of samples to realize the classification and recognition of data. The neural network

model classifies samples by exploring the functional relationship between input and output. This chapter

uses the processed data to establish support vector machine model and neural network model

respectively for table tennis skill identification and comparison.


3.3.1 Support vector machine model of the motor skills recognition


     In the support vector machine model, a classification method is found to separate the data sets, and


the corresponding optimization equation is simplified as shown in the equation.


                                                     min ω
                                                              2
                                            
                                                                                                     (35)
                                             s.t. yi (ω x + b ) ≥ 1
                                                         T




     In the above equation, ω is interval, yi is sample label.

     In order to improve the ability of support vector machine to classify nonlinear data sets, the kernel

function of support vector machine model is set as Gaussian kernel function. The support vector

machine model is used to classify players’ motion status. However, the classification of player’s motion

skills is not a binary classification, so the traditional support vector machine model needs to be

improved. Considering that there are only six states of action skills of table tennis players, we choose to

improve the support vector machine model based on directed acyclic graph to realize the

multi-classification problem of action skills recognition of table tennis players. In this paper, six motor

skills were classified and identified based on the Directed Acyclic Graph Support Vector Machine

(DAGSVM) model. The classification of directed acyclic graph for the recognition of six motor skills
of table tennis players is shown in Figure 9.

                                                                       A vs F



                                                              B vs F            A vs E



                                                     C vs F            B vs E            A vs D



                                            D vs F            C vs E            B vs D            A vs C



                                 E vs F              D vs E            C vs D            B vs C             A vs B



                           F                  E                 D                 C                 B                  A




                                 Figure 9 Topology of Directed Acyclic Graphs

     As shown in Figure 9, a directed acyclic graph structure based on DAGSVM model can be

completed by classifying and identifying 6 motor skills of table tennis players for 5 times.


3.3.2 Motor skill recognition model based on deep learning

     Deep learning is a data-driven model, and its internal rules can be fitted by learning sample data

[47]. Deep learning is widely used in computer vision, natural language processing and reinforcement

learning [48-50]. Based on the new features of dimensionality reduction of data in 3.2, a neural network

model is built to recognize and classify motor skills. In this neural network, there are 23 inputs and 6

outputs, and the activation function is softmax function. The input is the 23 new features after

dimensionality reduction in 3.2, and the output is to predict the probability of different motor skills

corresponding to this group of samples. The output is in the form of one-hot vector. Finally, the

classification of maximum probability is selected as the result of motor skill recognition. Parameters for

setting the neural network are shown in Table 3, and the corresponding neural network topology is

shown in Figure 10.

                                Table 3 Neural Network Parameter Setting Table
                                    Parameter Name                                                         Set Value

                        The Sample Size of Training Data Set                                                60000
                         The Sample Size of the Test Data Set                                               12000
                                          Learning Rate                                                      0.01
                                The Size of Input Nodes                                                       23
                               The Size of Hidden Layers                                                       2
                               The Size of Hidden Nodes                                                      120
                               The Size of Output Nodes                                                        6
                                  Activation Function                                                      Softmax
                                   Training Approach                                      Stochastic Gradient Descent
                    F1 Feature
                    F2 Feature
                    F3 Feature
                    F4 Feature
                    F5 Feature




                                                                                   …
                                                            …



                                                                      …
                          …




                                              …
                    F23 Feature

                              Input Layer                Hidden Layers       Output Layer

                                     Figure 10 Neural Network Topology

4. Motor skill evaluation model
     After the recognition of the motor skills of table tennis players, it is necessary to evaluate them.

Firstly, choose to establish different evaluation levels; Secondly, determine the relative weights of

different evaluation levels. Then, establish different levels of evaluation indicators; Finally, based on the

evaluation indexes of different evaluation levels, establish an evaluation model of table tennis players’

motor skills.


4.1 Hierarchical evaluation system of motor skills

     The evaluation system of table tennis motor skills can be comprehensively considered from the

following aspects. 1) The fitness of the strength of the motor skill. The strength of a table tennis player

in the process of completing a motor skill can be used as an evaluation index to evaluate the player’s

power, which can be constructed by means of the mean value of the synthetic acceleration. 2) The

fitness of direction of playing force. The force direction of table tennis players in completing a motor

skill is also an important factor to be considered. This evaluation index can be constructed by three

acceleration direction vectors. 3) The fitness of velocity of motor skills. The velocity of a table tennis

player in the process of completing a motor skill can measure the velocity of the swing of the bat in

playing, and this evaluation index can be constructed by synthesizing the mean value of velocity. 4) The

fitness of velocity direction of motor skills. Table tennis players need to consider not only the velocity

but also the direction of velocity when completing a motor skill. This index is constructed by three

velocity direction vectors. 5) The fitness of posture angle of motor skills. Table tennis players also need

to maintain the posture angles corresponding to motor skills in the process of doing a motor skill. This
index is constructed by three posture direction vectors. The above five levels can be achieved through

the table tennis motor skill evaluation system as shown in Figure 11.




                                            Hierarchical Evaluation
                                            System of Motor Skills




                                                                                    Velocity
     Strength of The       Direction of        Velocity of Motor                                   Posture Angle of
                                                                                   Direction of
       Motor Skill        Playing Force             Skills                                          Motor Skills.
                                                                                   Motor Skills




       Synthetic
                        Each Acceleration           Synthesis                      Each Velocity
      Acceleration                                                                                  Posture Angle
                            Direction              Velocity Size                     Direction
       Magnitude




                            Figure 11 Table Tennis Motor skill Evaluation System

     As shown in Figure 11, the evaluation of motor skills is divided into five evaluation levels: strength,

force direction, velocity, velocity direction and posture angle. Corresponding evaluation indexes are

established for each evaluation level to build an evaluation system. The contribution of the five

evaluation levels to the evaluation scores can be written as follows.

                                                             5
                                                   Q = ∑ K i Qi                                                      (36)
                                                         i =1


     The weights of different evaluation levels are determined based on analytic hierarchy process, and

the pairwise comparison matrix is constructed, as shown in the following.


                                              1     1           1   1       1 
                                                        3               5    7
                                              3     1           3   3       1 
                                                                             5
                                          A = 1     1           1   1       1                                       (37)
                                                        3               3    7
                                                    1                       1 
                                              5      3
                                                        3            1
                                                                              3
                                                                              
                                              7     5 7             3       1 

      Based on the analytic hierarchy process, the shown pairwise comparison matrix is used to

calculate the relative weight of five evaluation levels, that is, [0.0556, 0.2055, 0.0592, 0.1715, 0.5081],

the scores of five evaluation levels of contribution can be expressed as as shown in the following.
                             Q = 0.056Q1 + 0.206Q2 + 0.059Q3 + 0.172Q4 + 0.508Q5                     (38)

      Among the five evaluation levels, the level of strength includes three evaluation indexes of

acceleration in three directions. The level of force direction includes three evaluation indexes of

acceleration in three directions. The level of velocity includes three evaluation indexes of velocity in

three directions. The level of velocity direction includes three evaluation indexes of velocity in three

directions. The level of attitude Angle includes three evaluation indexes of Euler Angle in three

directions. A level includes three evaluation indicators. The importance of each evaluation indicator in a

level is regarded as the same. Based on this, a three-level evaluation system with 15 evaluation

indicators is constructed.


4.2 Score of each evaluation index

     In the same evaluation level, the features of the level are jointly determined by each evaluation

index, so we do not consider the difference of the contribution of each evaluation index to the evaluation

of the same level. The following is the establishment of evaluation function of each evaluation index.

(1) Level evaluation of strength

     In table tennis motor skills, the contribution of acceleration to motor skills is positive, so

acceleration should be a very big index. The acceleration data collected are normalized and evaluated by

Logistic function, as shown in the equation.


                                                                  1
                                            Q1 = 1 −               ( a − Ea )
                                                                                                     (39)
                                                              −
                                                                  aup − adown
                                                       1+ e

     In the above, Ea is the average level of acceleration, aup is the maximum value of a, adown is the

minimum value of a. The Logistic function shown in the equation can map the acceleration information

into the interval [0,1] to achieve data normalization and thus serve as the evaluation score of the

evaluation index.


(2) Level evaluation of force direction
     In table tennis motor skills, the contribution of acceleration direction to motor skills should be


within the appropriate interval, so the acceleration direction should be an interval index. The interval


function is established and normalized for the acceleration data collected, as shown in the equation.


                       −
                           a _ θ down − a _ θ 
                                                
                 1 − e           k1           
                                                      a_θ < a _ θ down
                
            =Q2       1                        a_θ down < a_θ < a_θup                                  (40)
                            a_θ − a_θup 
                         −
                                    k2
                                             

                  1 − e
                                             
                                                       a_θ > a_θup

     In the above, k1 is the loss coefficient lower than the lower boundary. k2 is the loss coefficient

higher than the upper boundary. a_θ down is the lower bound of the angular direction in the corresponding

motor skill. a_θup is the upper bound of the angular direction in the corresponding motor skill. The

function shown in the equation can be used to normalize the interval index of the direction of force, and

make evaluation scores.

(3) velocity level evaluation

     In table tennis motor skills, the contribution of velocity to motor skills is positive, so velocity

should be a very big index. The velocity data collected is normalized and evaluated by Logistic function,

as shown in the equation.


                                                                   1
                                             Q3 = 1 −               ( v − Ev )
                                                                                                        (41)
                                                               −
                                                                   vup − vdown
                                                        1+ e

     In the above, Ev is the average level of velocity, vup is the maximum value of v, and vdown is the

minimum value of v. The Logistic function can map the velocity information to the interval [0,1] to

achieve the normalization of the velocity data and thus serve as the evaluation score of the evaluation

index.

(4) Level evaluation of velocity direction

     In table tennis motor skills, the contribution of velocity direction to motor skills should be within

the appropriate interval, so velocity direction should be an interval index. The interval function is

established and normalized for the collected velocity data, as shown in the equation.
                                              v _ θ down − v _ θ 
                                           −                     
                                      1− e            k1          
                                                                           v _ θ < v _ θ down
                
           =Q4                           1                        v _ θ down < v _ θ < v _ θup         (42)
                                                v _ θ − v _ θup 
                                             −
                                                        k2
                                                                  

                                     1− e                       
                                                                            v _ θ > v _ θup

     In the above, k1 is the loss coefficient when the velocity is lower than the lower boundary. k2 is the

loss coefficient when the velocity is higher than the upper boundary. v_θ down is the lower bound of the

angular direction in the corresponding motor skill. v_θup is the upper bound of the angular direction in

the corresponding motor skill. The function shown in the equation can be used to normalize the interval

index of velocity direction and make evaluation score.


(5) Posture angle level evaluation


     In table tennis action skills, the posture angle direction is the most important to the standard degree


of action skills, and the attitude Angle should be within the appropriate interval, so the attitude Angle


direction should be an interval index. The interval function is established and normalized for the


collected attitude data, as shown in the equation.


                                                         α
                                                       −  down
                                                                 −α 
                                                                    
                                             1− e 
                                                              k1     
                                                                             α < α down
                   
               =Q5                             1                        α down < α < α up              (43)
                                                          α −α up 
                                                       −
                                                           k2 
                                                                    
                                            1− e                           α > α up

     In the above, k1 is the loss coefficient when the velocity is lower than the lower boundary. k1 is the

loss coefficient when the velocity is higher than the upper boundary. v_θ down is the lower bound of the

angular direction in the corresponding motor skill. v_θup is the upper bound of the angular direction in

the corresponding motor skill. The function shown in the equation can be used to normalize the interval

index of velocity direction and make evaluation score.


5. Results and analysis
     The artificial intelligence player motor skill recognition method and motor skill hierarchical

evaluation system constructed by the features established in this paper are calculated, and the model

results are solved and analyzed.
5.1 Results of motor skill identification of table tennis players
     In order to solve the table tennis player motor skill recognition model based on feature construction

proposed in this paper, the motor skill recognition model based on feature construction support vector

machine model and the motor skill recognition model based on feature construction neural network

model are solved respectively and compared with the traditional convolutional neural network.

     The training performance of the feature-based neural network model and the traditional

convolutional neural network model is shown in Figure 12.




    a)BP Neural Network Training Performance                   b)Training Performance of Convolutional Neural

                                                                                 Network

                          Figure 12 Training Performance of Two Neural Network Models

     As shown in Figure 12 , it can be seen that BP neural network based on feature construction is

superior to traditional convolutional neural network in training data set and test data set, and the error of

BP neural network based on feature construction is smaller.

     The support vector machine model based on feature construction is respectively compared. The

confusion matrix of the neural network model based on feature construction and the traditional

convolutional neural network model is shown in Figure 13.




  a) Heat Map Display of Confusion        b) Heat Map Display of Confusion        c) Heat Map Display of Confusion
Matrix of Training Data Set of Support   Matrix of Training Data Set of Neural     Matrix of Training Data Set of
   Vector Machine Model Based on             Network Model Based on Feature              Traditional Convolutional Neural
        Feature Construction                           Construction                              Network Model




  d) Heat Map Display of Confusion          e) Heat Map Display of Confusion          f) Heat Map Display of the Confusion
   Matrix of Test Data Set Based on          Matrix of Test Data Set of Neural          Matrix of the Test Data Set of the
 Feature Construction Support Vector         Network Model Based on Feature              Traditional Convolutional Neural
           Machine Model                               Construction                              Network Model
             Figure 13 Performance of the Three Prediction Models in the Training Data Set and the Test Data Set


     In the classification model, some indicators are commonly used to measure the classification effect

of the classification model, such as precision, recall, F1 measure, etc. Precision describes the

classification accuracy of the classifier, recall reflects the completeness of the classifier’s search for a

certain real category, and the F1 measure reflects the robustness of the model, considering precision and

recall comprehensively, .

     The precision of any classification in the classifier is defined as the proportion of the real category

of the classification in all predictions of the classification. The precision is shown in the formula.


                                                         TP
                                          =P                   × 100%                                                    (44)
                                                       TP + FP
     In the above equation, TP is the number of real categories in the category. FP is the number of

predicted categories in the category which real categories are not in.

     The recall of any classification in the classifier is defined as the proportion of the real category of

the classification in all the real categories, and the recall is shown in the equation.


                                                         TP
                                         =P                    × 100%                                                    (45)
                                                       TP + FN

     In the above equation, TP is the number of real categories in the category. FN is the number of real

categories in this category which predicted categories are not in.

     The F1 measure defining any classification in the classifier is the proportion of the real category of

the classification to the linear combination of the predicted category and the real category. The F1

measure is shown in the following.
                                                   2TP
          =P                                                        × 100%                                   (46)
                                         2TP + 2α FN + 2(1 − α ) FP

     In the above, TP is the number of real categories in the category. FP is the number of predicted

categories in the category which real categories are not in. FN is the number of real categories in the

category but predicted categories are not in. α is the weight coefficient of precision and recall, the value

interval is [0,1], which is used to determine the preference of precision and recall in the measurement of

the final classifier.

     In the recognition of motor skills of table tennis players, the accuracy of real classification

recognition is more sensitive, that is, the weight of precision should be greater than the recall. Therefore,

the weight coefficient of precision and recall is set as α = 0.7 , and F1 measure is used to measure the

classification ability of the model.

     By comparing the support vector machine model based on feature construction, the F1 measure

scores of the neural network model based on feature construction and the traditional convolutional

neural network model on the training data set and the test data set are shown in Figure 14.




         Figure 14 F1 Scores of the Three Prediction Models on the Training Data Set and the Test Data Set


     As shown in Figure 14, in the training data set, classification effects are respectively:

feature-constructed     neural    network     model,    traditional   convolutional     neural    network    and

feature-constructed support vector machine model. In the test data set, the classification effects are as

follows: feature constructed neural network model, feature constructed support vector machine model

and traditional convolutional neural network. When extending the model learned from the training data

set to the test data set, the recognition effect of the support vector machine (SVM) model and the BP

neural network (BP-NN) model declines a bit, but the decline trend of the recognition effect of the
traditional convolutional neural networks (CNN) model is more obvious, which indicates that the

traditional CNN model has the phenomenon of local overfitting, and the generalization ability of the

model is not as good as the BP neural network model constructed based on the feature.


5.2 Evaluation of system results
    Based on the evaluation system in 4.2, the feature database of standard players’ movements is

established, and the evaluation model is established with the evaluation criteria of movements in the

feature database. The movement data of 50 professional players and 50 amateur players are respectively

uploaded for scoring. The scoring results are shown in Figure 15.




                              Figure 15 Scoring Diagram of Evaluation Model


    As shown in Figure 15, on the whole, professional players score better on motor skills than amateur

players. The scores of 50 motor skills of professional and amateur players are counted respectively, as

shown in Figure 16.
                                 Figure 16 Table tennis players score statistics


     As shown in Figure 16, the average score of professional players is higher than that of amateur

players, the fluctuation of motor skill score is lower than that of amateur players, the maximum value of

motor skill score is higher than that of amateur players, the minimum value of motor skill score is higher

than that of amateur players, and the range of motor skill score is smaller than that of amateur players. It

can be seen from Figure 16 that the motor skill evaluation system can make scientific evaluation on the

motor skills of table tennis players and play a reasonable role in evaluating the motor skills of table

tennis players.


6 Conclusion
     Based on the use of various motor skills in table tennis and the need of monitoring the

standardization of motor skills, this study established a set of motor skills recognition and evaluation

system for table tennis players. The system includes movement information collection, movement

information processing, motor skill recognition, motor skill evaluation and other functions of table

tennis players. The main contributions of this study are as follows:

1) Developed a set of table tennis player data measurement system, which can be used to measure player’

movement information.

2) The characteristic database of six standard motor skills of table tennis players is established, which is

used to establish the standard motor skills.
3) The motor skill recognition model based on the movement information of table tennis players is

established, which can realize the recognition of the motor skill of table tennis players.

4) The hierarchical evaluation system of table tennis players’ motor skills has been established, which

can evaluate the corresponding motor skills of table tennis players.


References
[1] A. Moura, A. Graca, A. MachPhail, P. Batista, Aligning the principles of assessment for learning
     to learning in physical education: A review of literature, Phys. Educ. Sport Pedagogy. 26 (2021)
     388–401. https://doi.org/10.1080/17408989.2020.1834528.
[2] V.M. Lopez Pastor, J.M. Gea Fernandez, Innovation, Discourse & Rationality in Physical
     Education. Review and Prospective, Rev. Int. Med. Cienc. Act. Fis. Deporte. 10 (2010) 245–270.
[3] G.H. Sage, Physical education, sociology, and sociology of sport: Points of intersection, Sociol.
     Sport J. 14 (1997) 317–339. https://doi.org/10.1123/ssj.14.4.317.
[4] O. Cho, W. Choi, Y. Shin, The effectiveness of school physical education on students’ cognitive
     competence: a systematic review and meta-analysis, J. Sports Med. Phys. Fitness. 62 (2022) 575–
     584. https://doi.org/10.23736/S0022-4707.21.11796-7.
[5] T.V. Lobos Mantovani, D.T. Maldonado, E. dos S. Freire, The Relationship Between Health and
     School Physical Education: An Integrative Review, Movimento. 27 (2021) e27008.
     https://doi.org/10.22456/1982-8918.106792.
[6] D. Dias, J.P. Silva Cunha, Wearable Health Devices-Vital Sign Monitoring, Systems and
     Technologies, Sensors. 18 (2018) 2414. https://doi.org/10.3390/s18082414.
[7] A.K. Yetisen, J.L. Martinez-Hurtado, B. Uenal, A. Khademhosseini, H. Butt, Wearables in
     Medicine, Adv. Mater. 30 (2018) 1706910. https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.201706910.
[8] J.E. Morais, J.P. Oliveira, T. Sampaio, T.M. Barbosa, Wearables in Swimming for Real-Time
     Feedback: A Systematic Review, Sensors. 22 (2022) 3677. https://doi.org/10.3390/s22103677.
[9] A. Zhang, Z Shi, M Fan, Z Huang, Design of wireless motion sensor node monitoring system
     based on LabVIEW, Foreign Electronic Measurement Technology. 41 (2022) 81–86.
     https://doi.org/10.19652/j.cnki.femt.2103232.
[10] Extraction method for touch interactive motion users, involves calculating motion parameters,
     extracting trajectory-level features from motion parameters, and performing statistical analysis on
     sub-trajectories to extract graphic features, n.d.
     https://www.webofscience.com/wos/alldb/full-record/DIIDW:2020629150 (accessed April 25,
     2023).
[11]D.L. Beavers, E.H. Chung, Wearables in Sports Cardiology, Clin. Sports Med. 41 (2022) 405–423.
     https://doi.org/10.1016/j.csm.2022.02.004.
[12] T. Wu, F. Wu, J.-M. Redoute, M.R. Yuce, An Autonomous Wireless Body Area Network
     Implementation Towards IoT Connected Healthcare Applications, Ieee Access. 5 (2017) 11413–
     11422. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2017.2716344.
[13] M. Chen, Y. Ma, Y. Li, D. Wu, Y. Zhang, C.-H. Youn, Wearable 2.0: Enabling Human-Cloud
     Integration in Next Generation Healthcare Systems, Ieee Commun. Mag. 55 (2017) 54–61.
     https://doi.org/10.1109/MCOM.2017.1600410CM.
[14] R. Vahidnia, F.J. Dian, Radiation Safety Hazards of Cellular IoT Devices, in: 2020 11th IEEE
     Annu. Inf. Technol. Electron. Mob. Commun. Conf. IEMCON, 2020.
    https://www.zhangqiaokeyan.com/academic-conference-foreign_meeting_thesis/0205111558594.
    html (accessed April 25, 2023).
[15] Y. Zhao, T. Heida, E.E.H. van Wegen, B.R. Bloem, R.J.A. van Wezel, E-health Support in People
    with Parkinson’s Disease with Smart Glasses: A Survey of User Requirements and Expectations in
    the Netherlands, J. Park. Dis. 5 (2015) 369–378. https://doi.org/10.3233/JPD-150568.
[16] Y. Lee, W. Yang, T. Kwon, Data Transfusion: Pairing Wearable Devices and Its Implication on
    Security for Internet of Things, Ieee Access. 6 (2018) 48994–49006.
    https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2859046.
[17] R.K. Lomotey, K. Sofranko, R. Orji, multimodal technologies and interaction enhancing privacy
    in wearable iot through a provenance architecture, (2019). https://doi.org/10.3390/mti2020018.
[18] System for health monitoring through wearables using Internet of Things (IoT), has body
    temperature sensor, pulse monitoring sensor, global positioning system (GPS) tracker, display to
    show output values, communication service network with IoT support and battery to operate
    sensors, n.d. https://www.webofscience.com/wos/alldb/full-record/DIIDW:2022481324 (accessed
    April 25, 2023).
[19] H. Yoon, S.-H. Park, K.-T. Lee, Lightful user interaction on smart wearables, Pers. Ubiquitous
    Comput. 20 (2016) 973–984. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00779-016-0959-z.
[20] A.M. Sabatini, Estimating Three-Dimensional Orientation of Human Body Parts by
    Inertial/Magnetic Sensing, Sensors. 11 (2011) 1489–1525. https://doi.org/10.3390/s110201489.
[21] G.A. Leiva-Valenzuela, M. Mariotti, G. Mondragon, F. Pedreschi, Statistical pattern recognition
    classification with computer vision images for assessing the furan content of fried dough pieces,
    Food Chem. 239 (2018) 718–725. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2017.06.095.
[22] I. Moon, F. Yi, B. Javidi, Automated Three-Dimensional Microbial Sensing and Recognition
    Using Digital Holography and Statistical Sampling, Sensors. 10 (2010) 8437–8451.
    https://doi.org/10.3390/s100908437.
[23] H. Togashi, S. Katsunuma, Cellular recognition and patterning in sensory systems, Exp. Cell Res.
    358 (2017) 52–57. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.yexcr.2017.04.005.
[24] G. Astolfi, F.P.C. Rezende, J.V.D.A. Porto, E.T. Matsubara, H. Pistori, Syntactic Pattern
    Recognition in Computer Vision: A Systematic Review, ACM 计算调查第. 54 (2021) 65:1-65:35.
    https://doi.org/10.1145/3447241.
[25] Y.U. Xiaomei, X.U. Dan, Study of Appearance-based Subspace Face Recognition Algorithms,
    Appl. Res. Comput. 24 (2007) 10–12.
[26] V. Govindan, A. Shivaprasad, Character-Recognition - a Review, Pattern Recognit. 23 (1990)
    671–683. https://doi.org/10.1016/0031-3203(90)90091-X.
[27] A.U. Bari, Blaschkolinear dermatoses - An overview of interesting patterned dermatological
    disorders, Jcpsp-J. Coll. Physicians Surg. Pak. 17 (2007) 299–302.
[28] V. Asanza, E. Pelaez, F. Loayza, L.L. Lorente-Leyva, D.H. Peluffo-Ordonez, Identification of
    Lower-Limb Motor Tasks via Brain-Computer Interfaces: A Topical Overview, Sensors. 22 (2022)
    2028. https://doi.org/10.3390/s22052028.
[29] S.M. Man, B.J. Jenkins, Context-dependent functions of pattern recognition receptors in cancer,
    Nat. Rev. Cancer. 22 (2022) 397–413. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41568-022-00462-5.
[30] A. Bothe, U. Gartner, S. Kramer, Neural Classifiers in Acoustical Pattern-Recognition, Tech.
    Mess. 62 (1995) 88–94.
[31] J.K. Kamarainen, V. Kyrki, H. Kalviainen, Invariance properties of Gabor filter-based features -
    Overview and applications, Ieee Trans. Image Process. 15 (2006) 1088–1099.
    https://doi.org/10.1109/TIP.2005.864174.
[32] S. Oliveira, D.D. de Sousa Fernandes, G. Veras, Overview of Analytical Techniques Associated
    with Pattern Recognition Methods in Sugarcane Spirits Samples, Crit. Rev. Anal. Chem. 49 (2019)
    477–487. https://doi.org/10.1080/10408347.2018.1548926.
[33] Z. Lu, K. Tong, X. Zhang, S. Li, P. Zhou, Myoelectric Pattern Recognition for Controlling a
    Robotic Hand: A Feasibility Study in Stroke, Ieee Trans. Biomed. Eng. 66 (2019) 365–372.
    https://doi.org/10.1109/TBME.2018.2840848.
[34] A.R. Rivera, J.R. Castillo, O. Chae, Local Directional Number Pattern for Face Analysis: Face and
    Expression Recognition, Ieee Trans. Image Process. 22 (2013) 1740–1752.
    https://doi.org/10.1109/TIP.2012.2235848.
[35] P. Li, H. Liu, Y. Si, C. Li, F. Li, X. Zhu, X. Huang, Y. Zen, D. Yao, Y. Zhang, P. Xu, EEG Based
    Emotion Recognition by Combining Functional Connectivity Network and Local Activations, Ieee
    Trans. Biomed. Eng. 66 (2019) 2869–2881. https://doi.org/10.1109/TBME.2019.2897651.
[36] Y. Saijo, E.P. Loo, S. Yasuda, Pattern recognition receptors and signaling in plant-microbe
    interactions, Plant J. 93 (2018) 592–613. https://doi.org/10.1111/tpj.13808.
[37] S. Seo, S.-H. Jo, S. Kim, J. Shim, S. Oh, J.-H. Kim, K. Heo, J.-W. Choi, C. Choi, S. Oh, D.
    Kuzum, H.-S.P. Wong, J.-H. Park, Artificial optic-neural synapse for colored and color-mixed
    pattern recognition, Nat. Commun. 9 (2018) 5106. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-07572-5.
[38] F. Boutrot, C. Zipfel, Function, Discovery, and Exploitation of Plant Pattern Recognition
    Receptors for Broad-Spectrum Disease Resistance, in: J.E. Leach, S.E. Lindow (Eds.), Annu. Rev.
    Phytopathol. Vol 55, Annual Reviews, Palo Alto, 2017: pp. 257–286.
    https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-phyto-080614-120106.
[39] J.R. Kwapisz, G.M. Weiss, S.A. Moore, Activity recognition using cell phone accelerometers,
    ACM. (2011). https://doi.org/10.1145/1964897.1964918.
[40] N. Ravi, N. Dandekar, P. Mysore, M.L. Littman, Activity recognition from accelerometer data, in:
    Innov. Appl. Artif. Intell., 2005. http://www.xueshufan.com/publication/98188630 (accessed May
    4, 2023).
[41] W. Jia, M. Sun, J. Lian, S. Hou, Feature dimensionality reduction: a review, Complex Intell. Syst.
    8 (2022) 2663–2693. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40747-021-00637-x.
[42] R. Rani, M. Khurana, A. Kumar, N. Kumar, Big data dimensionality reduction techniques in IoT:
    review, applications and open research challenges, Clust. Comput. 25 (2022) 4027–4049.
    https://doi.org/10.1007/s10586-022-03634-y.
[43] P.J. Schmid, Dynamic Mode Decomposition and Its Variants, Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech. 54 (2022)
    225–254. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-fluid-030121-015835.
[44] Juliana. Moreira, Bruno. Silva, Hugo. Faria, Rubim. Santos, A.S.P. Sousa, Systematic Review on
    the Applicability of Principal Component Analysis for the Study of Movement in the Older Adult
    Population, Sensors. 23 (2022). https://doi.org/10.3390/s23010205.
[45] V. Bruni, M.L. Cardinali, D. Vitulano, A Short Review on Minimum Description Length: An
    Application to Dimension Reduction in PCA, Entropy. 24 (2022) 269.
    https://doi.org/10.3390/e24020269.
[46] S. Rani, K. Lakhwani, S. Kumar, Three dimensional objects recognition & pattern recognition
    technique; related challenges: A review, Multimed Tools Appl. 81 (2022) 17303–17346.
    https://doi.org/10.1007/s11042-022-12412-2.
[47] M. Lochner, B. Bassett, machine learning for transient classification workshop 13, Proc. Int.
    Astron. Union. 14 (2017) 274–274. https://doi.org/10.3847/0067-0049/225/2/31.
[48] S. Minaee, N. Kalchbrenner, E. Cambria, N. Nikzad, M. Chenaghlu, J. Gao, Deep Learning-based
    Text Classification: A Comprehensive Review, Acm Comput. Surv. 54 (2022) 62.
    https://doi.org/10.1145/3439726.
[49] K. Lakshmanna, R. Kaluri, N. Gundluru, Z.S. Alzamil, D.S. Rajput, A.A. Khan, M.A. Haq, A.
    Alhussen, A Review on Deep Learning Techniques for IoT Data, Electronics. 11 (2022) 1604.
    https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics11101604.
[50] S. Zhang, Y. Li, S. Zhang, F. Shahabi, S. Xia, Y. Deng, N. Alshurafa, Deep Learning in Human
    Activity Recognition with Wearable Sensors: A Review on Advances, Sensors. 22 (2022) 1476.
    https://doi.org/10.3390/s22041476.
