     Understanding whole-body inter-personal dynamics between two players using neural

                         Granger causality as the explainable AI (XAI)



                 Ryota Takamidoa*, Chiharu Suzukib, Jun Otaa, Hiroki Nakamotoc,



a
    Research into Artifacts, Center for Engineering (RACE), School of Engineering, The University

    of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8654, Japan
b
    Department of Sport Science, National Institute of Fitness and Sports in Kanoya, Kanoya,

    Kagoshima 891-2393, Japan
c
    Faculty of Physical Education, National Institute of Fitness and Sports in Kanoya, Kanoya,

    Kagoshima 891-2393, Japan



*Corresponding author: Ryota Takamido

Center for Engineering, School of Engineering, The University of Tokyo

7-3-1 Hongo Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8654, Japan

Email: takamido@race.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp
Abstract

Background: Simultaneously focusing on intra- and inter-individual body dynamics and elucidating

how these affect each other will help understand human inter-personal coordination behavior. However,

this association has not been investigated previously owing to difficulties in analyzing complex causal

relations among several body components. To address this issue, this study proposes a new analytical

framework that attempts to understand the underlying causal structures behind each joint movement

of individual baseball players using neural Granger causality (NGC) as the explainable AI.

Methods: In the NGC analysis, causal relationships were defined as the size of the weight parameters

of the first layer of a machine-learning model trained to predict the future state of a specific time-series

variable. To verify the approach in a practical context, we conducted an experiment with 16 pairs of

expert baseball pitchers and batters; input datasets with 27 joint resultant velocity data (joints of 13

pitchers and 14 batters) were generated and used for model training.

Results: NGC analysis revealed significant causal relations among intra- and inter-individual body

components such as the batter’s hands having a causal effect from the pitcher’s throwing arm.

Remarkably, although the causality from the batter’s body to pitcher’s body is much lower than the

reverse, it is significantly correlated with batter performance outcomes (R2=0.69).

Conclusions: The above results suggest the effectiveness of NGC analysis for understanding whole-

body inter-personal coordination dynamics and that of the AI technique as a new approach for

analyzing complex human behavior from a different perspective than conventional techniques.



Keywords: interpersonal coordination, explainable-AI, granger causality, motor control, sports



1. Introduction

Interacting with other humans through our body is one of the fundamental human cognitive motor

skills that form the basis of living (handing over objects to others and expressing intentions through

hand gestures). These interactive behaviors of humans are called inter-personal coordination (IC) [1].

While IC analysis has been conducted with relatively simple movements, such as synchronizing a part

of the body with others in the experimental room [2, 3], IC analysis in sports contexts allows us to
gain insights into more complex, whole-body, dynamic, and long-sequential interactions and to verify

the findings in more practical environments. Therefore, several studies have analyzed how humans

interact with others through their bodies in sports contexts and have obtained useful insights into how

humans organize complex IC in sports contexts [4-7].



However, the problem with these approaches is a lack of understanding of whole-body dynamics in

intra- and inter-individual interactions. Since previous studies aimed to find the “control variable,”

which defines the complex interaction among players, such as the distance between two persons [6],

the human body was represented by a few key variables. However, because our body has a complex

structure consisting of a large number of joints, muscles, and bones, movement is also organized by

intra-individual interactions among these body components, called the kinetic chain or energy flow [8,

9], which is necessary to understand the detailed mechanism of IC in sports. For example, in tennis

service situations, the motion of the service player is organized by the dynamics of sequential

interactions from the lower to the upper body [10]; a receiver observes it and tries to understand the

intention through the underlying dynamics in the opponent’s body movement [11]. Finally, the receiver

also starts to generate a series of interactions within their body as a response to the opponent’s action

[12]. From the perspective of the dynamical system theory, interpersonal synergies are higher-order

control systems formed by coupling the movement-system degrees of freedom of two (or more) actors

[13]; however, intra-body synergies are stronger than inter-body synergies [14]. Therefore, to

understand whole-body IC, as in the above example, we need to simultaneously focus on intra- and

inter-individual whole-body dynamics and verify how these dynamics affect each other. No study has

been conducted regarding this aspect because of the high complexity and difficulty in analyzing

complex sequential (causal) relationships among many body components.



Recent advances in machine-learning techniques have enabled us to adopt different approaches to

understanding the cognitive-motor behavior of humans. An explainable AI (XAI) [15] is a concept

that attempts to uncover the black box between the input and output of the machine-learning model

and increases the interpretability and explainability of the outcome, such as identifying the reason for
the disease diagnosis [16]. Compared to conventional statistical models, one of the advantages of this

approach is its high ability to model the nonlinear relationships among a large amount of time-series

data. Some recent studies have attempted to identify the characteristics of expert behavior from

multiple time-series data [17, 18] and construct an automatic feedback system for novices [19, 20].

Therefore, there is a potential that XAI analysis can help us understand the whole-body IC.



Based on the above background, this study proposes a new approach to understanding the underlying

causal relations of whole-body IC using neural Granger causality (NGC) [21] as the XAI. NGC is a

state-of-the-art causal estimation technique that identifies nonlinear Granger causal relations among

multiple time-series data by referencing the weights of the neural network model trained to predict

future states of the target variable based on the previous data of other variables, including the variable

itself. It is expected that using NGC, we can clarify causal relations among both intra- and inter-

individual joint movements and understand the dynamics of whole-body IC in sports through the

“causal graph.” Our approach reframes whole-body human movement as information (causality) flow

among intra- and inter-individual body joints and analyzes both in the same plane (Figure 1). If we

quantitatively measure the causal relations inside and outside the body using NGC, we can apply

conventional statistical analysis to identify the key player or joint with a large causality with other

players.



Among the many motor skills, the interaction between pitchers and batters in bat-and-ball sports (e.g.,

baseball or cricket) was set as the target skill in this study for verifying the effectiveness of the

approach. This selection is because both players’ movements (i.e., pitching and hitting) consist of

whole-body movements with a long sequential kinetic chain from the lower to the upper joints [22,

23]. Hence, they should show strong intra-body causal relationships if the NGC analysis can capture

these causal structures. Moreover, evidence suggests that although the hitting movement is performed

on the flying ball, it is strongly affected by the pitcher’s movement before ball release [24-26]. Hence,

we can confirm its ability to detect interbody causal relationships. Furthermore, because there is a time

lag between the pitching and hitting movements owing to the waiting time for the ball to arrive at the
batter [27], we can also confirm whether the NGC can identify such a specific lagged structure behind

the motion of both players. Finally, since the hitting movement is considered one of the most difficult

skills in the world [28], if we can find a clue for defining the success and failure of hitting through the

NGC analysis, it is also worthwhile from a practical viewpoint.



Therefore, the IC between pitchers and batters in bat-and-ball sports is a good example for verifying

the effectiveness of our proposed approach in analyzing complex whole-body IC in a sports context.

This study aimed to address the following three challenges that are difficult to verify using existing

techniques.



Challenge 1: Quantitative evaluation of the impact of one player's actions on other players.

The degree to which the information of a player’s whole-body movement contributes to the generation

of that of other players and how this affects performance outcomes is unclear. Although some existing

techniques, such as cross-correlation [29] or transfer entropy [30], can partially address this problem,

they have difficulty dealing with a large number of causal relations (27 × 27 joint combinations) that

do not ensure linearity and stationarity.



Challenge 2: Identification of the key body components that organize the IC. The results of previous

research [31, 32] suggest that a key body component contributes to organizing the IC (e.g., the

pitcher’s throwing arm); however, it is difficult to quantitatively evaluate the contribution of such local

information to others’ whole-body dynamics in the existing methodologies.



Challenge 3: Identification of underlying lagged structure inside the IC. Although there is a time lag

in intra- and inter-personal coordination (time lag for kinematic chains and responses to other people),

identifying and evaluating the lagged structures in the same plane is difficult. Because sports skills

impose strict temporal constraints on players [33], this aspect may also be a critical factor in

understanding the mechanism of IC.
 Figure 1. Schematic image of the causality graph for understanding underlying causal relations in
 whole-body IC of (a) baseball, (b) soccer, and (c) contact sports such as judo. The allow represents
 the causal direction and size between body joints.


2. Methods

This section provides detailed information regarding the methodology of our approach. Note that since

there are many “hyperparameters” included in the process of our approach, such as the selection of

the feature variables to the network or dawn-sampling rate, we discussed in detail how to tune those

parameters and the effect of changing them on the results of this study in the supporting information

file. All datasets and sample codes for our analysis are freely available on GitHub

(https://github.com/takamido/NGC_data_baseball).



2.1 Participants

In total, 23 male expert baseball players, 7 pitchers (6 right-handed, 1 left-handed) and 16 batters (9

right-handed, 7 left-handed), aged 19–23 years (height: 1.73 ± 0.06 m, weight: 75.0 ± 7.9 kg, body

mass index: 24.9 ± 1.7 kg/m2) participated in the experiment. The average years of experience in

baseball was 12.8 ± 1.9 years. All the participants were on college baseball teams and participated in

regular baseball training and competitions. This study was approved by the University’s Institutional

Review Board for Human Subjects Research and conformed to the principles of the Declaration of

Helsinki. All the participants involved in this study provided written informed consent.



2.2 Apparatus and procedure
Before starting the experiment, each of the 16 batters was assigned to play against one of the seven

pitchers; of the seven pitchers, two pitched against three batters, and the remaining five pitched against

two batters. Consequently, 16 pairs of pitchers and batters were selected for this experiment. Because

the NGC analysis extracts the relative relationship between two players, replacing one player

qualitatively changes the type of interaction between them. Hence, the 16 pairs were treated

independently if one player differed.



In the experiment, one pitcher and one batter were instructed to play against each other, as in a real

game, until the batter completed 10 swings (including non-contact cases). To decrease the number of

pitches and the risk of injury, we instructed the pitchers to pitch the fastball to the center of the strike

zone, and the batters were instructed to hit all the balls going there. The mean ball speed of all pitchers

was 76.8 mph. When the pitched ball did not pass through the strike zone, the batters could not swing.

No other experimental controls were used to obtain data on pitcher-batter interactions in a game-like

context.



For more detailed procedures, after receiving the instructions, the pitchers and batters warmed up, as

in a regular game, and the reflective markers were set up. The reflective markers were attached to the

regio parietalis (head), both sides of the acromion (shoulder), lateral epicondyle of the humerus

(elbow), radial styloid process (wrist), greater trochanter of the femur (hip), lateral condyle of the

femur (knee), heel, and the top of the shoes. For the batters, reflective markers were also placed on the

bat tip and knob. To unify the sense of each body joint between right- and left-handed players, the

right-side joints of a right-handed pitcher and batter are described as "back-(joint name),” and the left

side body joints are described as "front-(joint name),” and vice versa for left-handed players. The

measurements started after the markers were in place. When the participants performed the

pitching/hitting movement, the position data of the reflective markers attached to each batter and

pitcher’s body were measured at 250 Hz using 32 synchronized optical motion capture cameras (16

Raptor-E and 16 Kestrel2200 cameras, Motion Analysis Corp, Santa Rosa, USA). In addition, the

performance of pitchers, such as pitched ball velocity, was measured using a trackman system
(TRACKMAN, Vedbaek, Denmark), and the hitting results, such as contact/non-contact and in-

field/out-field, were manually recorded for analysis.



2.3 Whole-body IC analysis using NGC

2.3.1 Dataset generation for NGC analysis

Based on the collected motion-capture data of the pitcher and batter, the input datasets for NGC

analysis were generated as follows: First, a low-pass filter with a cutoff frequency of 10 Hz was applied

to the motion-capture data, and the resultant velocity of each joint was calculated as the feature value.

The whole-body motion of the pitcher and batter was represented by a set of resultant velocities of

each joint, and this study attempted to capture the characteristics of “velocity interaction” between

two players. A total of 27 resultant velocities of each joint, comprising 13 variables for the pitcher’s

joints (head, shoulders, elbows, wrists, hips, knees, and heels) and 14 variables for the batter’s joints

and tool (13 joints and bat tips), were calculated. Subsequently, to unify the timescale of each trial, the

timing of the pitcher’s ball release was identified by detecting the time of the peak value of the back-

wrist velocity of the pitcher, and the data were clipped from 2 s before and 0.5 s after ball release.

Finally, the resultant velocity of each joint was normalized to a range of 0 to 1 to equalize the effect

of increasing or decreasing the weights of the neural network and downsampled from 250 Hz to 50

Hz to capture the interactions on a long-term scale. Figure 2 shows an example of the standardized

resultant velocity of each joint measured in the experiment. This study attempted to understand the

underlying causal structure among these time-series data through NGC analysis while removing the

boundary of each body. As a result of these processes, an input dataset of 125 points (50 Hz × 2.5 s) ×

27 variables × 10 swings was generated for all 16 pairs.
Figure 2. Example of input feature variables, i.e., normalized resultant velocity data of 27 joints of a
pitcher (1-13) and a batter (14-27) clipped from 2 s before and 0.5 s after ball release (10 pitches for
one pair of pitcher and batter).



2.3.2 NGC calculation from generated input datasets

To understand the underlying causal relationships in the input datasets, as shown in Figure 2, we

calculated the NGC for each of the 16 pairs of datasets. The NGC used in this study was calculated

using a component-wise multilayer perceptron (cMLP) proposed by Tank et al. [21]. NGC calculations

using our datasets are summarized below.



Figure 3 shows a schematic of the cMLP used in this study for NGC calculation. The cMLP is trained
to predict the velocity of a specific joint at a specific time 𝑥!,# based on the past velocity of the joints

of the pitcher and the batter (including the target joint itself), whereas the available range for past data

is set by a maximum lag K. Because the weight of the non-causal parameter to 𝑥!,# converges to zero

during training and the size of the weights represents the strength of the Granger causality, we can

identify the causal relationship among each joint movement of the pitcher’s and the batter’s bodies by

referencing the weight parameters of the trained model. If the batter’s movement is influenced by the

pitcher’s movement, the weight parameters of the pitcher’s joints increase when predicting the batter’s

movement.



Formally, given MLP with 𝐿 − 1 layers, the vector ℎ#$ ∈ 𝑅% represents the values of the m-

dimensional lth hidden layer at time t, weights parameter 𝑾 = {𝑊 & , … , 𝑊 ' }, and weights at the first

layer across time lag K, 𝑊 & = {𝑊 && , … , 𝑊 &' }, and the bias parameter for each layer 𝒃 = {𝑏& , … , 𝑏' },

the output from the first hidden layers, is calculated as follows:



                                                *

                                     ℎ&# = 𝜎 23 𝑊 &( 𝒙#)( + 𝑏& 6 ,                                      (1)
                                               (+&




where 𝜎 is the activation function. After passing through the 𝐿 − 1 hidden layers, the time-series

output 𝑥#! , is given by a linear combination of units in the final hidden layer:



                              𝑥#! = 𝑔! (𝑥,# ) + 𝑒#! = 𝑊 ' ℎ#')& + 𝑏' + 𝑒#! ,                            (2)



where 𝑒#! is modeled as mean-zero Gaussian noise, 𝑥,#! = <… , 𝑥(#).)! , 𝑥(#)&)! =, and 𝑔! is a

nonlinear function. The NGC is defined by the weight parameter in Equation (2), which was adjusted

through the training process using the following penalty equation:
                               2                                  4
                                                           .
                         min 3 B𝑥!,# − 𝑔! <𝑥(#)&):(#)*) =C + 𝜆 3 𝛺<𝑊:3& =,                         (3)
                          𝒘
                              #+*                                3+&




where 𝛺<𝑊:3& = is a regularization term that applies the penalty to the sum of the weights at the first

layer for input time series data and helps to avoid overestimating the number of causal relations.

Similar to the original article [21], this study adopts a group sparse group lasso penalty. Using

Equation (3), the weights of the non-causal parameter converge to zero.



Specifically, this study adopted a cMLP with one hidden layer and 32 hidden units for NGC

calculation; the maximum time lag K was set as 1.0 s (50 points), and a rectified linear unit was used

for the activation function. During model training with the generated datasets, the model was

separately trained on the datasets of each pair. Because the data from the 10 swings were batched, the

network was trained to identify their common features. The iterative shrinkage thresholding algorithm

was used for training; the learning rate was 0.05, regularization parameter 𝜆 was 0.003, and iteration

number was 2000. The implementation was performed on an NVIDIA V100 GPU with Tensor Core

and exhibited high prediction accuracy (𝑅. > 0.9). The training time was less than 2 min for all pairs.

The effect of hyperparameters for training, such as 𝜆, is also verified in the supporting information

file.
  Figure 3. Schematic image of cMLP models for NGC calculation based on the motion-capture data
  of a baseball pitcher and batter. This model predicts the velocity of a specific joint at a specific time
  𝑥!,# based on the past velocity of the joints of the pitcher and batter (including the target joint itself)
  while the available range for past data is set at a maximum lag K. The weights of the first layer
  correspond to the strength of the NGC, and darker colored lines indicate larger weights.



2.3.3 Analysis of obtained NGC parameters

Because of the training process, the whole-body IC between the pitcher and the batter was quantified

using NGC 𝑛𝑔𝑐!,3,( , which represents the strength of the causal relationship from joint j to i with a

specific time lag k. Here, we describe how to address the three challenges mentioned in the

Introduction through statistical analysis of the obtained NGCs.



Analysis 1: Quantitative evaluation of the impact of one player's actions on other players

To address the first challenge, we quantified the size of the interaction between the intra- and inter-

individual bodies of pitchers and batters using the following procedure. First, the NGC matrix 𝐶56 =
N𝑛𝑔𝑐&,& , 𝑛𝑔𝑐&,. , … , 𝑛𝑔𝑐&,.7 , … , 𝑛𝑔𝑐.7,.7 O was calculated for each pair by taking the sum of causality

over the allowed time lag.



                                                    *

                                         𝑛𝑔𝑐!,3 = 3 𝑛𝑔𝑐!,3,( ,                                         (4),
                                                   (+&




where 𝑛𝑔𝑐!,3 indicates the size of the NGC from joints j to i (i.e., whether the motion of joint j affects

that of joint i). Figure 4 shows a schematic image of the NGC matrix. The upper left and lower right

regions indicate intra-personal causality, that is, NGC from the pitcher’s joints to the pitcher’s joints

and from the batter’s joints to the batter’s joints, respectively. The upper right and lower left regions

indicate inter-personal (inter-body) causality, corresponding to that from the pitcher’s joints to the

batter’s joints and the batter’s joints to the pitcher’s joints, respectively. Therefore, we can quantify

the mean strength of both the intra- and interbody causal relationships using the following equations:



                                                              &8 &8
                                              1
                                𝑛𝑔𝑐44 =               3 3 𝑛𝑔𝑐!,3 ,                                     (5)
                                        13 ∗ (13 − 1)
                                                              !+& 3+&
                                                                  !93

                                                              .7    .7
                                             1
                               𝑛𝑔𝑐:: =               3 3 𝑛𝑔𝑐!,3 ,                                      (6)
                                       14 ∗ (14 − 1)
                                                             !+&; 3+&;
                                                                   !93

                                                         .7    &8
                                                1
                                   𝑛𝑔𝑐4: =           3 3 𝑛𝑔𝑐!,3 ,                                      (7)
                                             14 ∗ 13
                                                        !+&; 3+&

                                                        &8     .7
                                              1
                                   𝑛𝑔𝑐:4 =         3 3 𝑛𝑔𝑐!,3 ,                                        (8)
                                           13 ∗ 14
                                                        !+& 3+&;




where 𝑛𝑔𝑐44 and 𝑛𝑔𝑐:: indicate the mean Granger causality among the pitcher and batter’s body

joints and 𝑛𝑔𝑐4: and 𝑛𝑔𝑐:4 indicate the mean Granger causality from the pitcher to the batter’s

body and the batter to the pitcher’s body, respectively. To focus on the causal relations between

different body joints, we removed the diagonal component of 𝐶56 that represents causality from the
same joint (autoregression). Because the penalty term in Equation (3) forces the sum of the overall

weights to decrease, we can evaluate and compare the stability of individual movement patterns and

the degree of influence of other players in the same plane. If individual movement patterns are highly

stable and less influenced by others, 𝑛𝑔𝑐44 and 𝑛𝑔𝑐:: are predicted to be significantly larger than

𝑛𝑔𝑐4: and 𝑛𝑔𝑐:4 .



To statistically test whether there were significant differences in the size of mean causality among

intra- and inter-individual body joints. First, the mean values of four causal indexes (𝑛𝑔𝑐44 , 𝑛𝑔𝑐:: ,

𝑛𝑔𝑐4: , 𝑛𝑔𝑐:4 ) were calculated among the 16 pairs. Then, a one-way repeated-measures ANOVA was

conducted, and a post-hoc (Holm–Bonferroni) pairwise comparison was used to determine whether

there was a significant difference in the mean value of the four causal indexes. Furthermore, to verify

whether the size of the indexes was related to the batter’s performance outcome, the mean contact rate

and in-field rate were also calculated as the performance indexes for each pair based on the records in

the experiment, and a one-way MANOVA was conducted for the contact rate and in-field rate while

considering the four indexes of IC and mean ball speed of each pitcher as dependent variables. If

significance was observed, a post-hoc ANOVA was conducted to identify the index that significantly

affected the performance outcomes.



These analyses were conducted using R Statistical Software (R Development Core Team, 2016), and

the significance level was set at 0.05. The effect sizes were assessed using the partial eta-squared (η2)

and Cohen's d for post-hoc ANOVA and t-tests. Furthermore, because estimating the statistical power

before conducting this analysis was difficult, we performed a post-power analysis to calculate the

smallest possible effect size that could be detected with our sample (16 pairs) using G Power software

[34]. We decided that an alpha error probability would determine a statistical significance of <0.05,

and the power was set to >0.80. The results indicated that the smallest possible effect sizes η2 and d

were 0.21 and 0.75.
 Figure 4. NGC matrix obtained from cMLP training. 𝑛𝑔𝑐!,3 indicates whether the motion of joint j is
 the Granger causality of the motion of joint i.



Analysis 2: Identification of the key body components that organize the IC.

To identify the key body component of the IC, we calculated the mean values of 𝑛𝑔𝑐!,3 among the

16 pairs, 𝑛𝑔𝑐
          VVVVVVV.
               <,= The specific components of 𝑛𝑔𝑐
                                              VVVVVVV
                                                   <,= represent inter-personal causality (lower left and


upper right areas of Figure 3).



                                    VVVVVVVVO = N𝑛𝑔𝑐
                                   N𝑛𝑔𝑐′         VVVVVVVO                                               (9)
                                          <,=         <,= !+&;:.7,3+&:&8 ,




                                    VVVVVVVVV
                                   N𝑛𝑔𝑐′′  <,= O = N𝑛𝑔𝑐
                                                    VVVVVVVO
                                                         <,= !+&:&8,3+&;:.7 ,                         (10),



       VVVVVVVV
where N𝑛𝑔𝑐′  <,= O indicates the set of NGCs from a specific pitcher’s joints to a specific batter’s joints,
     VVVVVVVVV
and N𝑛𝑔𝑐′′  <,= O indicates that of the batter to the pitcher. If its component shows a positive value, it


indicates an NGC from joint j to joint i (e.g., the pitcher’s back hand to the batter’s front wrist). Since

                                  VVVVVVV
NGC is the non-negative variable (𝑛𝑔𝑐  <,= ≥ 0 for all 𝑖, 𝑗), we set the threshold of the mean value of


𝐶56 excluding diagonal components to capture the too-small causality in the statistical test.



To statistically verify whether a joint has a significantly large NGC compared to other player’s joints,

                                                                                VVVVVVVV
we conducted one-sample t-tests with the above threshold for each component of N𝑛𝑔𝑐′  <,= O and

 VVVVVVVVV
N𝑛𝑔𝑐′′  <,= O. Benjamini & Hochberg’s (BH) method was applied to adjust significance, and the other


settings for the statistical analysis are the same as in Analysis 1. The smallest possible effect d was

calculated as 0.65 for one-sample t-tests to detect one-tailed significance.



Analysis 3: Specifying underlying lagged structure inside the whole-body IC.

Finally, to address the challenge of quantifying the lagged relations, the components of the NGC

matrix 𝑛𝑔𝑐!,3 were replaced by 𝑙!3 , which indicates the time lag that maximizes the NGC from joint

j to i:



                                      𝑙!3 = argmax<𝑛𝑔𝑐!,3,( = /50                                    (11).
                                             &?(?*




Same as in Analysis 1, the mean time lags in both intra- and inter-body coordination, 𝑙44 , 𝑙:: , 𝑙4: ,

𝑙:4 were calculated by replacing the 𝑛𝑔𝑐!,3 in Equations (5)–(8) with 𝑙!3 . These four lag indexes

were calculated for each participant, and the same statistical analysis as in Analysis 1 was applied. To

avoid including the data of an NGC that was too small, the same threshold as in Analysis 2 was applied

to calculate the four lag indexes.



Results

Figure 5 shows an example of the NGC matrix 𝐶56 obtained from the weights of the trained model

and the causal graph between the pitcher and the batter. As shown in this figure, through NGC analysis,
we can understand the characteristics of the whole-body IC between the pitcher and batter (e.g., the

causality from the pitcher to the batter is larger than that from the batter to the pitcher, and the batter

tends to have causality from the pitcher’s throwing arm). The detailed results of each analysis are

presented below.
Figure 5. (a) Example of the NGC matrix obtained from the analysis (one pair of pitcher and batter).
The terms “pb_” and “pf_” represent the pitcher’s back and front joints (right and left for right-
handed), and “bb_” and “bf_” represent the batter’s back and front joints. The color intensity indicates
the degree of causality. (b) Causal graph representation of the matrix. The arrow and width of lines
indicates the direction and degree of NGC, respectively.
Analysis 1: Quantitative evaluation of the impact of one player's actions on other players

Figure 6 shows the mean and standard deviation of the four causality indexes (𝑛𝑔𝑐44 , 𝑛𝑔𝑐:: , 𝑛𝑔𝑐4: ,

𝑛𝑔𝑐:4 ) among 16 pairs of data. A one-way repeated measure ANOVA suggested significant differences

among four indexes (F(3, 60) = 2.75, p < .01, η2 = 0.90). Post-hoc pairwise comparisons revealed that

the mean NGC from a pitcher’s body to another pitcher’s body (𝑛𝑔𝑐44 ) is significantly larger than that

among batter’s joints (𝑛𝑔𝑐:: ), from the pitcher to the batter’s joint (𝑛𝑔𝑐4: ), and from the batter to the

pitcher’s joint (𝑛𝑔𝑐:4 ), with higher statistical power than the criteria (t(15) = 4.1, p < .01, d = 2.9,

t(15) = 13.2, p < .01, d = 4.7, t(15) = 59.0, p < .01, d = 20.9, respectively). 𝑛𝑔𝑐:: is significantly

larger than the 𝑛𝑔𝑐4: and 𝑛𝑔𝑐:4 (t = 8.3, p<.01, d = 2.9, t(15) = 14.7, p < .01, d = 5.2, respectively),

and 𝑛𝑔𝑐4: is significantly larger than the 𝑛𝑔𝑐:4 (t(15) = 8.4, p < .01, d = 3.0). Therefore, while the

pitcher has a high causality within his body and few causalities from the batter’s motion, the batter has

more causal relationships with the pitcher’s motion, and its motion is highly constrained; hence, they

have an asymmetrical relationship.



Moreover, the MANOVA analysis suggested a significant effect of the four NGC indexes on the in-

field rate (F(1, 14) = 10.9, p < .01, η2 = 0.60), with no significant effect on the contact rate (p > .05).

The post-hoc analysis by a separate ANOVA indicated that the factor of ball speed, 𝑛𝑔𝑐44 and 𝑛𝑔𝑐:4 ,

has significant effects with a large statistical power on the mean in-field rate among 10 swings of the

batter (F(1, 14) = 6.6, p=.02, η2 = 0.32, F(1, 14) = 9.4, p < .01, η2 = 0.40, F(1, 14) = 32.1, p < .01, η2

= 0.69, respectively). Therefore, as shown in Figure 7, although the mean ball speed of each pitcher

also significantly affects the hitting result, the causal relationship between the pitcher and the batter

has a larger effect. Although the size of the NGC from the pitcher’s joints to the batter’s joints 𝑛𝑔𝑐:4

is small, whether the hitting ball falls into the in- or out-field depends highly on it.
 Figure 6. The differences in mean NGC from the pitcher’s body to the pitcher’s body (NGC_pp), the
 batter’s body to the batter’s body (NGC_bb), the pitcher’s body to the batter’s body (NGC_pb), and
 the batter’s body to the pitcher’s body (NGC_bp). The error bar indicates the standard distribution
 of 16 pairs (**: p < .01).




 Figure 7. The relationship between NGC and performance outcomes. (a) 𝑛𝑔𝑐44 and in-field rate
 of 10 pitches (b) 𝑛𝑔𝑐:4 and in-field rate. Colors are classified based on the differences in the
 opponent pitcher.


Analysis 2: Identification of the key body components that organize the IC.

Table 1 presents the results of Analysis 2. A total of 10 pitcher joints had a significantly larger NGC

than the threshold (0.015), and six joints had a larger effect size than the criteria but did not show
significance. Figure 8 shows a graph of the NGC in Table 1. From Table 1 and Figure 8, we can identify

the key body components of the pitcher that organize the batter’s motion, such that the pitcher’s

throwing arm (back elbow and wrist) has a high causality with the batter’s hand motion (front and

back wrist, bat tips). In addition, no batter joints had high causality to the pitcher’s joints (p > .05).




 Table 1. The summary of the results of Analysis 2. The NGC in this table indicates the size from
 the pitcher’s joint to the batter’s joint.
                          Figure 8. The causal graph of the NGC in Table 1.



Analysis 3: Specifying underlying lagged structure inside the whole-body IC.

Figure 9 (a) presents the mean and standard deviation of the three time-lag indexes (𝑙44 : 0.13±0.01 s,

𝑙:: : 0.07±0.04 s, 𝑙4: : 0.49±0.06 s). Since more than 90% of combinations of joints used for the

calculation of the 𝑙:4 showed a smaller NGC than the threshold for all pairs, we excluded the variable

from the analysis. A one-way repeated measure ANOVA revealed significant differences among four

indexes (F(2, 45) = 3.20, p < .01, η2 = 0.95). Post-hoc pairwise comparisons revealed that the mean

time lag from the pitcher’s joints to the batter’s joints (𝑙4: ) was significantly longer than that among

the pitcher’s joints (𝑙44 ) and the batter’s joints (𝑙:: ) (t(15) = 26.4, p < .01, d = 6.2, t(15)= 5.6, p < .01,

d = 1.4, respectively), and 𝑙44 was significantly longer than 𝑙44 (t = 8.3, p<.01, d = 2.9). Therefore,

there are significantly different lag relationships within the pitcher’s body, the batter’s body, and

among the pitcher and batter’s body. Figure 9 (b) shows the plots of the mean NGC between each joint

at each time lag.
 Figure 9. The results of Analysis 3. (a) Mean time lag among the batter’s joints (blue), the pitcher’s
 joints (red), and the pitcher’s to batter’s joints (green) that maximizes the NGC between specific
 joints. The error bar indicates the standard deviation of the 16 pairs. (b) Mean NGC between each
 joint at each time lag among the 16 pairs of data. All combinations of joints in each domain are
 plotted here (14 × 13 lines for blue, 13 × 12 lines for red, and 13 × 14 lines for green).



Discussion

Analysis 1 revealed the characteristics of the causal relationship between pitchers and batters. There

were significant differences among the four causal indexes (𝑛𝑔𝑐44 , 𝑛𝑔𝑐:: , 𝑛𝑔𝑐4: , 𝑛𝑔𝑐:4 ), and the

percentages of the sum of all causalities were approximately 49%, 31%, 19%, and 1%. As discussed

in previous research [27], this asymmetric relationship seems to reflect the differences in their roles in

the game, that is, the differences in task constraints. While the pitcher is in the dominant position and

controls the initiation and end of the pitching movement, the batter must observe and follow it while

predicting the ball’s trajectory. Although the previous study [27] partially analyzed this asymmetric

relationship, the present study first quantified it by considering the causal relationships of all the joints

of the two players’ bodies. From a simple calculation, approximately 38% of NGC for the batter’s

movement generation was derived from the pitcher’s movement (𝑛𝑔𝑐4: /(𝑛𝑔𝑐:: + 𝑛𝑔𝑐4: )=0.38),

suggesting how the batter’s movement is constrained by the pitcher’s movement.



Furthermore, the results of Analysis 1 also suggested that each 𝑛𝑔𝑐44 and 𝑛𝑔𝑐:4 had negative and

positive effects on the performance outcome of the batter, that is, the in-field rate among 10 swings

(Figure 7). Remarkably, 𝑛𝑔𝑐:4 that indicates the mean NGC between the batter’s and the pitcher’s
joints showed a large effect on the performance (η2 = 0.69), although it accounts for only a small

percentage in the total causalities (approximately 1.0%). These results can be interpreted in several

ways. First, the movement stability and independence of the pitcher may be key factors in bat-and-

ball sports. Because a small difference in the release parameters, such as the release angle, causes a

large difference in the pitched ball [35], a small NGC from the batter to the pitcher's body may slightly

change the pitcher’s movement and significantly impact the performance outcome. Another possibility

is that the batter’s ability to predict the pitcher’s movements reflects these indexes. If the batter

accurately anticipates and models the pitcher's movement and consistently moves in advance of the

pitcher throughout the 10 swings, the NGC from the batter’s joint to the pitcher’s joint increases. Since

evidence suggests that expert batters tend to move against the pitcher more quickly than novices [26,

36] and the batter’s anticipatory skill significantly affects pitched-ball recognition [37] and impact

timing [38-39], the latter seems to have a larger possibility than the former.



In addition, the results of Analysis 2 revealed the key pitcher’s body components that have a large

causality with the batter’s movement. There are two main types of information resources. The first is

the motion of the pitcher’s throwing arm (back elbow and back wrist). This helps to determine the

critical factors for successful hitting, such as ball release timing, ball type, and speed, and the result

matches the existing findings [31-32]. Hence, it is natural for the batter to observe and follow the

pitcher’s throwing arm motion. The second type is the pitcher’s lower body (back knee and back heel),

which suggests that the batter also adjusts to the pitcher’s weight-shift movement. Because the

pitcher’s weight shift movement occurs before the arm-throwing motion, this result suggests that the

batter first uses the pitcher’s lower body information to roughly tune his hitting movement and then

uses the arm-throwing movement for fine-tuning. The findings of multiple information resources at

different movement stages match the existing model of anticipatory behavior in a striking sports

context [40], and the present study demonstrates this through NGC analysis.



NGC analysis can also detect the lagged structure in the whole-body IC, as shown in the results of

Analysis 3. The differences between the 𝑙44 and 𝑙:: , which represent the mean time lag that
maximizes the NGC among intra-pitcher and batter joints, are considered to be caused by the

difference in the dynamics between pitching and hitting movements. While the pitcher has sufficient

time to form the energy (causal) flow from the lower joints to the upper joints, the batter has temporal

constraints to do so with a limited amount of time until the ball arrives. A plot in Figure 9 for 𝑙44

shows causal relationships with a large time lag (0.2–0.4 s). Moreover, as discussed in the previous

study [27], since the value of the 𝑙4: (0.49 s) corresponds to the ball travel time of the pitcher

(approximately 0.50 s for 76.8 mph [41]), the batter interacts with the pitcher with a specific time lag.



Summarizing the results of the three analyses and the above discussions, we can understand the

dynamics of whole-body IC in bat-and-ball sports as follows: first, the pitcher starts generating a

causality flow within his body with a short time lag. Then, the flow is transmitted to the batter’s body

with a longer time lag that corresponds to the ball travel time, and the batter also starts to generate a

causality flow among his body joints while adjusting some parts of his movement based on the

pitcher’s key joint movement, such as the throwing arm. Although this causality flow is mostly one-

way from the pitcher to the batter, the hitting performance will improve if the batter shows the opposite

flow.



The insights presented in this study are the first to be revealed by NGC analysis and suggest its

effectiveness in understanding whole-body inter-personal coordination dynamics, and more broadly,

the effectiveness of the AI technique as a new approach for analyzing complex human behavior from

a different perspective than conventional techniques. Although this study focused on the whole-body

IC in bat-and-ball sports as the representative example, NGC analysis can be widely applied to human

interactive behaviors other than sports activities. Therefore, we expect that application of NGC

analysis to various motor skills and contexts will lead to the accumulation of new findings in

understanding complex human collective behavior.



This study had some limitations. First, because we mostly focused on the movement interaction

between the two players, it is necessary to verify the relationship between the perceptual and cognitive
aspects of both players. For example, if the batter changes the attention area from some parts of the

pitcher’s body to others or part of his own body, it may dramatically change the causal relationship

between the two players. Furthermore, although the pitchers only pitched the fastball in the experiment,

more variation in ball types may increase the use of the pitcher’s advanced kinematic information for

the batter and the causality from the pitcher to the batter. Finally, because this analysis can only capture

the relative relationships between two players, further control experiments, such as controlling

opponents’ movement and reaction in a virtual reality environment, are necessary to understand the

detailed mechanism of whole-body IC.



Conclusion

This study attempted to explain the underlying dynamics of whole-body IC between pitchers and

batters using the NGC as the XAI. We obtained several novel findings regarding the size of causality

among each intra- and inter-personal body joint in pitchers and batters, its relationship with

performance outcome, and the key pitcher’s body components that organize the batter’s movement

and lagged structure inside the whole-body IC. Applying the NGC analysis to whole-body IC in sports

can provide several insights that may be difficult to obtain from conventional approaches. Therefore,

using this new analytical approach combined with traditional methods, we can understand complex

human behavior in sports contexts more comprehensively. Further control experiments, such as those

controlling opponents’ movement and reaction in a virtual reality environment, are necessary to

understand the detailed mechanism of whole-body IC.



Acknowledgments

The data used in this study were captured at the Sports Performance Research Center of the National

Institute of Fitness and Sports, Kanoya (NIFS SPRC). The authors thank the members of the NIFS

SPRC and NIFS for their technical assistance with the experiments.



Funding

This work was supported by Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (Grant number: JP22K17712).
The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or

preparation of the manuscript.



Author Contributions

Ryota Takamido: Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Funding acquisition,

Investigation, Roles/Writing - original draft, Visualization

Chiharu Suzuki: Methodology, Resources

Jun Ota: Conceptualization, Supervision

Hiroki Nakamoto: Methodology; Supervision, Project administration



References

1. R. C. Schmidt, M. J. Richardson, Dynamics of interpersonal coordination, in Coordination:
     Neural, Behavioral and Social Dynamics (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg), 2008, pp. 281–308.
2. R. C. Schmidt, B. O’Brien, Evaluating the dynamics of unintended interpersonal coordination.
     Ecol. Psychol. 9 (1997) 189–206.
3. M. J. Richardson et al., Rocking together: Dynamics of intentional and unintentional
     interpersonal coordination. Hum. Mov. Sci. 26 (2007) 867–891.
4. P. Passos et al., Information-governing dynamics of attacker–defender interactions in youth
     rugby union. J. Sports Sci. 26 (2008) 1421–1429.
5. R. Duarte et al., Interpersonal coordination tendencies shape 1-vs-1 sub-phase performance
     outcomes in youth soccer. J. Sports Sci. 30 (2012) 871–877.
6. M. Okumura et al., A critical interpersonal distance switches between two coordination modes
     in kendo matches. PLOS ONE 7 (2012) e51877.
7. T. J. C. Pereira et al., Interpersonal coordination analysis of tennis players from different levels
     during official matches. J. Biomech. 67 (2018) 106–113.
8. B. M. Nigg, B. R. MacIntosh, J. Mester, Biomechanics and Biology of Movement,
     first edition (Human Kinetics, Champaign, IL), 2000.
9. S. K. Chu, P. Jayabalan, W. B. Kibler, J. Press, The kinetic chain revisited: New concepts on
     throwing mechanics and injury. PM R 8 (2016) S69–77.
10. C. Martin et al., Energy flow analysis during the tennis serve: Comparison between injured
     and noninjured tennis players. Am. J. Sports Med. 42 (2014) 2751–2760.
11. N. J. Smeeton, R. Huys, Anticipation of tennis-shot direction from whole-body movement:
     The role of movement amplitude and dynamics. Hum. Mov. Sci. 30 (2011) 957–965.
12. E. P. Roetert, M. Kovacs, D. Knudson, J. L. Groppel, Biomechanics of the tennis
     groundstrokes: Implications for strength training. Strength Cond. J. 31 (2009) 41–49.
13. M. A. Riley, M. J. Richardson, K. Shockley, V. C. Ramenzoni, Interpersonal synergies.
     Front. Psychol. 2 (2011) 38.
14. M. J. Richardson et al., Comparing the attractor strength of intra- and interpersonal interlimb
     coordination using cross-recurrence analysis. Neurosci. Lett. 438 (2008) 340–345.
15. E. Tjoa, C. Guan, A survey on explainable artificial intelligence (xai) : Toward medical xai.
     IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst. 32 (2021) 4793–4813.
16. B. H. M. van der Velden, H. J. Kuijf, K. G. A. Gilhuijs, M. A. Viergever, Explainable artificial
     intelligence (XAI) in deep learning-based medical image analysis. Med. Image Anal. 79
     (2022) 102470.
17. H. I. Ismail Fawaz et al., Accurate and interpretable evaluation of surgical skills from
     kinematic data using fully convolutional neural networks. Int. J. Comput. Assist. Radiol.
     Surg. 14 (2019) 1611–1617.
18. H. Takeuchi et al., Virtual reality system using explainable AI for identification of
     specific expert refinery inspection skills, in IEEE/ASME     International   Conference     on
     Advanced Intelligent Mechatronics (AIM), vol. 2023 (IEEE), 2023, pp. 1214–1219.
19. M. Wagner et al., Comparative validation of machine learning algorithms for surgical
     workflow and skill analysis with the heichole benchmark. Med. Image Anal. 86 (2023)
     102770.
20. D. Zhang et al., Automatic microsurgical skill assessment based on cross-domain transfer
     learning. IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett. 5 (2020) 4148–4155.
21. A. Tank et al., Neural Granger causality. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 44 (2022)
     4267-4279.
22. J. Howenstein, K. Kipp, M. B. Sabick, Energy flow analysis to investigate youth pitching
     velocity and efficiency. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 51 (2019) 523–531.
23. G. Horiuchi, H. Nakashima, S. Sakurai, Mechanical energy flow in torso during baseball toss
     batting. Sports Biomech. (2021) 1–11.
24. R. Ranganathan, L. G. Carlton, Perception-action coupling and anticipatory performance in
     baseball batting. J. Mot. Behav. 39 (2007) 369–380.
25. R. Takamido, K. Yokoyama, Y. Yamamoto, Hitting movement patterns organized by different
     pitching movement speeds as advanced kinematic information. Hum. Mov. Sci. 81 (2022)
     102908.
26. S. Müller et al., Pick-up of early visual information to guide kinetics and kinematics within a
     group of highly skilled baseball batters. Percept. Mot. Skills 119 (2014) 347–362.
27. R. Takamido et al., Interpersonal coordination analysis in bat-and-ball sports under a real
     game situation: Asymmetric interaction and delayed coupling. PLOS ONE 18 (2023)
    e0290855.
28. C. DeRenne, The Scientific Approach to Hitting: Research Explores the Most Difficult Skill
    in Sport (University Readers, San Diego (CA) ), 2007, pp. 1-10.
29. Y. Yagai, A. Miura, H. Mishima, N. Furuyama, Involvement of global coordinative structure
    in achieving the local pendulum swinging task. PLOS ONE 17 (2022) e0262525.
30. K. Takamizawa, M. Kawasaki, Transfer entropy for synchronized behavior estimation of
    interpersonal relationships in human communication: Identifying leaders or followers.
    Sci. Rep. 9 (2019) 10960.
31. T. Kato, T. Fukuda, Visual search strategies of baseball batters: Eye movements during the
    preparatory phase of batting. Percept. Mot. Skills 94 (2002) 380–386.
32. T. Takeuchi, K. Inomata, Visual search strategies and decision making in baseball batting.
    Percept. Mot. Skills 108 (2009) 971–980.
33. S. Kidokoro, Y. Matsuzaki, R. Akagi, Acceptable timing error at ball-bat impact for different
    pitches and its implications for baseball skills. Hum. Mov. Sci. 66 (2019) 554–563.
34. F. Faul, E. Erdfelder, A. G. Lang, A. Buchner, G*Power 3: A flexible statistical power
    analysis program for the social, behavioral, and biomedical sciences. Behav. Res.
    Methods 39 (2007) 175–191.
35. D. Nasu, M. Kashino, Impact of each release parameter on pitch location in baseball pitching.
    J. Sports Sci. 39 (2021) 1186–1191.
36. R. Takamido, K. Yokoyama, Y. Yamamoto, Task constraints and stepping movement of fast-
    pitch softball hitting. PLOS ONE 14 (2019) e0212997.
37. H. Nakamoto et al., Optimal integration of kinematic and ball-flight information when
    perceiving the speed of a moving ball. Front. Sports Act. Living 4 (2022) 930295.
38. T. Kimura, D. Nasu, M. Kashino, Utilizing virtual reality to understand athletic performance
    and underlying sensorimotor processing. Proceedings 2 (2018) 299.
39. R. Takamido, K. Yokoyama, Y. Yamamoto, Effect of manipulating advanced kinematic
    information on hitting movement prediction, perception, and action. Res. Q. Exerc. Sport 92
    (2021) 747–759.
40. S. Müller, B. Abernethy, Expert anticipatory skill in striking sports: A review and a model.
    Res. Q. Exerc. Sport 83 (2012) 175–187.
41. R. K. Adair, The physics of baseball. Phys. Today 48 (1995) 26–31.
Supporting information



Aim of this Supporting Information file
As is widely known, the performance of the machine learning model highly depends on the hyper
parameter settings. Although effect of some parameters has been verified in the original paper of NGC
(neural granger causality) [19], since this is the first study to use machine learning model for analyzing
the whole-body human movement in a sports context within our best knowledge, we consider it is
essential to sincerely provide how each hyperparameter affects the results and how we tuned those
parameters for avoiding the overvaluation of our method. Specifically, in this supporting information
file, we first describe the criteria for hyper parameter settings in this study, then, verified the relation
between the changes of each hyper parameters and results of the analysis.


Criteria for hyper parameter setting
For setting the hyper parameters, variable usage rate, which indicates the ratio of candidate
combinations of different body joints showing a positive NGC, was used for tuning of them. Figure
S1 shows the effect of different variable usage rate on the causal graph obtained from the NGC analysis.
If the value of variable usage rate is 0, there is no NGC among body joints and all joints’ movement
depends on the past information of themselves (i.e., autoregressive model). Also, if it shows 1.0, all
joints have NGC to all other joints. Obviously, these two cases should be avoided. Specifically, we
tuned the hyper parameters so that the mean variable usage rate among 16 pairs becomes around 0.25-
0.50 based on the following insights. First, if the variable usage rate is over 0.50, there always inter-
body joint combinations that have positive NGC, and this may lead the overestimation of the number
and size of inter-body NGC. Also, to avoid the underestimation of the number of joint combinations
that have NGC, we set the lower limit at 0.25 to capture about 50% of the NGC between inter-body
joints (0.25/2+0.25/2). If there is any body joint that has large NGC to opponent’s joints, we can also
identify through this criterion. As a result of parameter tuning, mean variable usage rate among 16
pairs is 0.30 ± 0.03 in this study.
Figure S1. The relations between differences variable usage rate and obtained causal graph from NGC
analysis (a) 0.16, (b) 0.33, (c), 0.68, (d) 0.88.


Testing effect of hyper parameters on the result
In this section, we verify the effect of hyper parameters on the result of the analysis of the paper.
Specifically, we verify the relations between the changes of hyper parameters and variable usage rate,
and the ration among four causal indexes (𝑛𝑔𝑐44 , 𝑛𝑔𝑐:: , 𝑛𝑔𝑐4: , 𝑛𝑔𝑐:4 ) of the Analysis1 of the
paper. Since the numerical value of NGC itself is not meaningful, we converted it to a ratio and
examined how their relative size changes with parameter setting. The following are explanations of
each parameter.


penalty term λ: this parameter penalizes the total amount of weights included in the trained model in
equation (3). If we set smaller λ value, the variable usage rate will be larger. We tested the impact of
this parameter with different values of 0.0001, 0.001, 0.003 (our setting), 0.005, 0.01, 0.1 while
keeping other parameters constant.


Sampling rate (down sampling rate): this parameter controls the time interval between the points
included in the input time series data. Since penalty term in equation (3) penalizes the sum of weights
for avoiding to include too many lagged causalities, if we try to capture the characteristics of the IC
with long time scale (several hundred milliseconds ~ several seconds), we need to down sample the
data from the original motion capture data with high frequency. We tested the impact of this parameter
with different values of 250 Hz (1.0), 125 Hz (2.0), 50 Hz (5.0, our setting), 25 Hz (10.0).


Maximum lag: this parameter controls the maximum time lag that is considered in the calculation. If
there is any hypothesis about this parameter (e.g., near the ball travel time 0.50 sec for the baseball),
it should be set as enough large to include it. We tested the impact of this parameter with different
values of 2.0 sec, 1.0 sec (our setting), 0.5 sec, 0.1 sec. Note that although we only change the value
of a single parameter in this file, the sampling rate should also be adjusted to keep the range of
maximum time-lag const (e.g., 100 Hz with 50 points (0.50 sec) and 200 Hz with 100 points (0.50
sec)).


Number of hidden units: this parameter indicates the number of hidden units included in the layer of
multi-layer perceptron. While the number of features that can be considered in the model increases as
the number of hidden units increases, the complexly of the model and required time for the training
process also increases. We tested the impact of this parameter with different values of 128, 64, 32 (our
setting), 16, 8.


Learning rate: this parameter controls the step size for updating the weight parameters at each iteration
based on the value of loss function. While if too small value of it increases the training time, too large
value makes it difficult to find the optimal solution. We tested the impact of this parameter with
different values of 0.1, 0.07, 0.05 (our setting), 0.03, 0.01.


Type of input variable: this parameter indicates the type of input variable to the model. Although this
study tried to capture the characteristics of the interaction between two players from the aspects of the
“velocity interaction”, the form of the interaction may change depends on the type. Therefore, we also
calculated the resultant acceleration data of each joint and verified this viewpoint.


Results and discussions
Table S1-S6 shows the effect of changing the hyper parameter on the mean value of variable usage
rate and the ratio of four causal indexes (𝑛𝑔𝑐44 , 𝑛𝑔𝑐:: , 𝑛𝑔𝑐4: , 𝑛𝑔𝑐:4 ) to sum of them. First, as
shown in the Table S1, the size of λ parameter affects the variable usage rate, i.e., if the penalty for the
weight parameter increases, the number of causal relations detected through the NGC analysis will
decrease. However, they are consistent with respect to their relative ratios to the sum of the weight
parameters. Hence, the change of the variable usage rate could be due to an increase in the detection
of small causalities. Therefore, if criteria are set to eliminate combinations of joints with such a small
causality, as in this study, we believe that a robust analysis is possible with respect to the increase or
decrease of this parameter except for the case that the variable usage rate is 1.0 or 0.0. On the contrary,
the size of the sampling rate affects the ratio of four causal indexes, i.e., the ratio of inter-personal
NGC (𝑛𝑔𝑐4: and 𝑛𝑔𝑐:4 ) decreases as this parameter increases (Table S2). As mentioned above, this
seems to be caused by the difficulty for detecting the long-time scale interaction (such as 0.50 sec
delay) with high sampling rate. This is evidenced by the fact that the same trend is observed for the
results of maximum time lag, i.e., if we allow only few time-lag, the inter-personal NGC decreases.


Further, from the results of number of hidden units (Table S4), this parameter has small effect on the
analysis. The slight difference of the variable usage rate is thought to be caused by differences in
convergence speed, i.e., larger number of hidden units require larger training time. However, if the
model tries to identify the causal structure in more complex interaction, this parameter should be
carefully tuned. Also, the learning rate has similar effect of the λ parameter, i.e., it has large effect on
the variable usage rate but not on the ratio of causal indexes (Table S5). The reason for increasement
of variable usage rate in 0.1 is that it cannot converge to the optimal solution due to the large step size.
Finally, slightly different results were observed by using resultant acceleration as the input data (Table
S6). Namely, by using the acceleration data, the ratio of NGC among pitcher’s body joints increased
while that of batter’s body joints decreased. Therefore, the type of input data may have some influence
on the results even if the overall trend is unchanged. To account for the effects of amplified noise in
acceleration data, this study adopts resultant velocity data as the input variable.


In summary of these results, although there are some sensitivities to the hyper parameter settings, we
consider that the criteria and analytical procedures defined in this study have yielded robust results.
Therefore, we believe that the setting of this study has a certain level of validity. However, when it
applies to other type of interaction or human movement, the sensitive hyper parameters such as the
down-sampling rate, maximum lag and type of input data should be carefully tuned.
Table S1. The impact of changing the value of λ parameter on the results. NGC_pp, NGC_bb,
NGC_pb, NGC_bp indicates the ratio of four causal indexes canulated in Analysis1 to the some of
them.




Table S2. The impact of changing the value of sampling rate (down sampling rate) parameter on the
results.




        Table S3. The impact of changing the value of maximum lag parameter on the results.
Table S4. The impact of changing the number of hidden units of the multi-layer perceptron on the
results.




      Table S5. The impact of changing the value of learning rate parameter on the results.




            Table S6. The impact of changing the type of input variable on the results.
