Multi-Tier Tournaments: Matching and
            Scoring Players




             Steven J. Brams
         Department of Politics
          New York University
         New York, NY 10012
                  USA
         steven.brams@nyu.edu

            Mehmet S. Ismail
     Department of Political Economy
         King’s College London
           London WC2R 2LS
                   UK
        mehmet.ismail@kcl.ac.uk
                                                                                                 2


                                             Abstract
    We introduce a novel system of matching and scoring players in tournaments, called
Multi-Tier Tournaments, illustrated by chess and based on the following rules:

    1. Players are divided into skill-based tiers, based on their Elo ratings.
    2. Starting with one or more mini-tournaments of the least skilled players (Tier 1), the
          winner or winners— after playing multiple opponents—move to the next-higher tier.
    3. The winners progress to a final tier of the best-performing players from lower tiers as
          well as players with the highest Elo ratings.
    4. Performance in each tier is given by a player’s Tournament Score (TS), which depends
          on his/her wins, losses, and draws (not on his/her Elo rating).

    Whereas a player’s Elo rating determines in which mini-tournament he/she starts play, TS
and its associated tie-breaking rules determine whether a player moves up to higher tiers and,
in the final mini-tournament, wins the tournament. This combination of players’ past Elo
ratings and current TS’s provides a fair and accurate measure of a player’s standing among the
players in the tournament. We apply a variation of Multi-Tier Tournaments to the top 20 active
chess players in the world (as of February 2024). Using a dataset of 1209 head-to-head games,
we illustrate the viability of giving lower-rated players the opportunity to progress and
challenge higher-rated players. We also briefly discuss the application of Multi-Tier
Tournaments to baseball, soccer, and other sports that emphasize physical rather than mental
skills.



Keywords: tournaments; schedule of matches; scoring of players; chess; games and sports
                                                                                                                      3


       1. Introduction

       There are many different kinds of tournaments, but here we focus on chess to illustrate our
analysis, providing precise rules for matching and scoring players in a tournament. Later we
discuss other kinds of tournaments to show the applicability of our analysis to different games
of mental skill as well as sports like baseball and soccer that emphasize physical skills.

       We introduce a novel system of matching and scoring players in tournaments, called
Multi-Tier Tournaments, illustrated by chess and applying the following rules:

       1. Players are divided into skill-based tiers, based on their Elo ratings.1
       2. Starting with one or more mini-tournaments of the least skilled players (Tier 1), the
           winner or winners—after playing multiple opponents—move to the next-higher tier.
       3. The winners progress to a final tier of the best-performing players from lower tiers as
           well as players with the highest Elo ratings.
       4. Performance in each tier is given by a player’s Tournament Score (TS), which depends
           on his/her wins, losses, and draws (not on his/her Elo rating).

      Whereas a player’s Elo rating determines in which mini-tournament he/she starts play, TS
and its associated tie-breaking rules determine whether a player moves up to higher tiers and,
in the final mini-tournament, wins the tournament. This combination of players’ past Elo
ratings and current TS’s provides a fair and accurate measure of the player’s standing among




1
    Elo (1978) ratings are a predictor of a match between two players, based on the difference in the players’

ratings. Thus, when a low-rated player defeats a high-rated player, the Elo score of the low-rated player

significantly increases and the high-rated player’s score significantly decreases; on the other hand, the more

similar the players’ ratings are, the less the players’ ratings are affected by the outcome of their match. In this

manner, Elo ratings are self-correcting, providing a measure of the strength of players in a pool, all of whose

members play each other. For more details, see https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Elo_rating_system. Like Elo, the

tournament score (TS) we propose in rule 4 depends on a player’s wins, draws, and losses, but only for players

in each mini-tournament (more on this later).
                                                                                                                 4


the players in the tournament. We apply a variation of Multi-Tier Tournaments to the top 20
active chess players in the world (as of February 2024). Using a dataset of 1209 head-to-head
games that we collected, we illustrate the viability of giving lower-rated players the
opportunity to progress and challenge higher-rated players. We also discuss the application of
Multi-Tier Tournaments to baseball, soccer, and other sports that emphasize physical rather
than mental skills.

       The International Chess Federation (FIDE) prescribes several rules for organizing
tournaments, which are distinctive in two major respects: (i) they have a fixed number of
rounds, which is significantly less than the number of participants; (ii) they match players
against opponents with similar scores after each round. Although the complete list of rules is
extensive, the following are especially relevant to our paper:

      1. Two players do not play against each other more than once.

      2. The difference between the number of Black and the number of White games played by
         each player is not greater than two.

      3. No player plays the same color three times in a row.

       Rule (1) promotes diversity and reduces the potential bias arising from repeated matchups
of the same players. Rule (2) promotes “color fairness,” which may be undermined by the first-
mover advantage of White in chess if one player plays more games with this color.2 However,
rule (2) allows a player to have one extra White game. Our analysis in Section 3 indicates a
significant bias favoring the players who had an extra White game. For example, 66% of the
top 10 finishers in major Swiss tournaments over the past decade had an extra White game.
Rule (3) addresses “psychological fairness,” because consecutively playing with the same
color may confer a psychological advantage (when playing with White) or disadvantage (when
playing with Black).




2
    To mitigate this bias, Brams and Ismail (2021) proposed a “catch-up” rule to put White and Black more on a
par.
                                                                                                                     5


      As we will show, our approach not only satisfies rules (2) and (3), and other standards of
fairness, but it also better balances the distribution of colors than the currently used Swiss
system. However, because it allows players to move into higher and higher levels of
competition, it is possible for two players who meet early in a tournament to be later
opponents. We do not think this is a serious violation of fair play, because knock-out
tournaments that satisfy (1)—by eliminating competitors after one loss—are not necessarily
fair to players in which a player’s lapse in one game can be more than made up for by wins in
the other games that he/she plays. We believe it is multiple games, at each tier in a tournament,
that should be the determinant of who stays in and who is eliminated.
      What is distinctive about our approach is its simplicity. It does not depend on indicators of
performance other than wins, losses, and draws in multiple contests; where draws are not
allowed or possible, this indicator can be dropped.3 This makes it applicable to very different
games and sports and, thereby, a general way of ranking competitors and choosing winners in
tournaments.


       2. Selecting and Scoring Players in Mini-Tournaments and Determining Winners


       (i)     Selection Algorithm
       Before players can be matched and scored in a tournament, they must be selected for a
mini-tournament. Players in the first mini-tournament of Multi-Tier Tournaments (Tier 1) are
those who have the lowest Elo ratings. For example, if there are 20 players in a tournament,
they might be the 8 players with the lowest ratings. Each of these players plays against the 7
others in Tier 1 and receives a Tier Score (TS), based on his/her wins, losses, and draws (more
on this later, in which we relax the assumption that every player plays against every other
player in a mini-tournament).

Example 1




3
    We propose, however, rules for breaking ties when players have identical TS’s. These are specific to chess and
will need to be revised in applying Multi-Tier Tournaments to other games and sports.
                                                                                                   6


    To illustrate how players move up from an 8-player mini-tournament in a 20-player
tournament, assume that the 2 players with the highest TS’s in Tier 1 move up to Tier 2,
joining the 6 players with the next-highest Elo scores. (Like Tier 1, Tier 2 would now have 8
players.) At the conclusion of the Tier 2 mini-tournament, the 2 players with the highest TS’s
in Tier 2 would move up to Tier 3, joining the 6 players with the highest Elo scores, so now
Tier 3 also has 8 players. The Tier 3 players then play a third and final mini-tournament, the
winner of which becomes the overall winner of the tournament.

    Altogether, 8 + 6 + 6 = 20 different players participate in up to three rounds of play. In
Tier 1, each of the 8 players plays against the 7 other players, and the 2 players with the
highest TS’s move up to Tier 2. Next, each of the 8 Tier 2 players plays against the 7 other
players in Tier 2, and the 2 players with the highest TS’s move up to Tier 3. These 8 players
play a final mini-tournament, and the player with the highest TS wins the tournament.

    Players from Tier 1 who move up to Tier 2 play a total of 7+7 = 14 games. If they succeed
in Tier 2 and move up to Tier 3, they play a total of 7+7+7 = 21 games. But if a player is not
one of the top two in either Tier 1 or Tier 2, he/she is knocked out of the final competition.

    The 6 players with the highest Elo scores, who start in Tier 3, play only 7 games, whether
they win or lose in this mini-tournament. Only the single player with the highest TS in Tier 3
wins the tournament. Thus, a player starting out with a low or even moderate Elo rating, and
therefore from a lower tier, means that he/she must play, and perform better, in more games
than players who start out in the highest tier.

    (ii)    Scoring Algorithm and Breaking Ties
    In the mini-tournaments of each tier, each player i receives a Tier Score (TSiJ) against all
its opponents in subset J of his/her tier (as we will illustrate shortly, this may not be all
members of his/her tier), according to the following formula:

                                            # of wins − # of losses
                                   TSiJ =
                                            # games played in tier
                                                                                                                    7


TSiJ varies from -1 (for a player who loses all his/her games) to +1 (for a player wins all his/her
games).

       TSiJ differs from Elo ratings in not being a dynamically changing measure of player i’s
strength, which may go up, down, or stay the same after each of a player’s matches. Instead,
TSiJ is a summary measure of i’s strength against his/her opponents in each of the mini-
tournaments in which he/she plays (subscript J in TSiJ is the subset of these players). For
example, a player could win a mini-tournament and move up to the next-higher tier, but in the
latter mini-tournament he/she might do poorly and be eliminated from the tournament.

      Notice that the denominator of TSiJ includes draws as well as wins and losses; the greater
the number of drawn games, the less the absolute value of TSiJ. If the numerator is positive,
this lowers the value of TSiJ (more drawn games make TSiJ less positive). If the numerator is
negative, this raises the value of TSiJ (more drawn games make TSiJ less negative). Thus, more
drawn games hurt a winning player but help a losing player, as one would expect. If the
numerator is 0, the number of drawn games is irrelevant.

      Put another way, winning a game increases TSiJ more than drawing a game, and drawing a
game increases TS more than losing a game. We think this is what a fair-scoring algorithm
should do.

      But what if the number of players in a mini-tournament is too great for each player to play
a game against every other player in his/her starting tier? This will be the case when the
number of players in a mini-tournament is greater than about 10, in which case we assume that
players play against only a proper subset of opponents.4 Before addressing the question of
choosing such a subset, we suggest four rules to break ties when two or more players have the
same TSiJ’s at the end of a mini-tournament.




4
    One could add more tiers to solve this problem, but this may make the tournament unduly lengthy if each tier
takes a few days to complete. Thus, if there are 10 players in a mini-tournament, and each player plays against 3
opponents a day, the mini-tournament will take three days to complete against the 9 opponents of each player.
                                                                                                               8


      When two players, A and B, have identical TSiJ’s after play concludes in any tier, we
propose the following rules to break ties:

       (i) If A and B play each other in a mini-tournament and A defeats B, A is ranked above B.
             If they draw or do not play a game against each other, go to step (ii).
       (ii) If A wins more games than B, A is ranked above B. (Note: B may also lose more
             games than A, but if B has more draws, it is possible that A and B may have the same
             TSiJ.)
       (iii) If A and B win the same number of games but A takes an average of fewer moves to
             defeat his/her opponents, A is ranked above B.
       (iv) If (i), (ii), or (iii), in that order, fail to break a tie in TSiJ’s between A and B—but their
             tie must be broken to determine which players go onto the next-higher tier or which
             player wins the tournament—use a random device to break the tie (e.g., by tossing a
             coin).

      We think (i), (ii), and (iii) will break almost all ties between two players in a mini-
tournament.5 These tie-breaking rules, except for (iv), are consistent with the better
performance of A or B. They can be extended to break ties among more than two players, and
thereby to determine, if necessary, which player or players remain in the competition, move to
a higher tier, or win the final mini-tournament and, therefore, the tournament.

       3. Constructing Fair Subsets of Players and Practical Concerns


       (i)       Subset-Construction Algorithm

       If there are too many players in a tier for each player to play against all other players in
that tier, then we need a way to find subsets of players whose average Elo rating is
approximately the same. Thereby the level of competition that every player faces in his/her




5
    Tie-breaking rule (iii) is perhaps least transparent. But we think defeating an opponent more quickly is
consistent with being a stronger player.
                                                                                                     9


subset will be approximately the same as the level he/she would face in any other subset of
opponents.

Example 2

   To illustrate how to construct equally competitive subsets, assume a 2-tier system, but now
with 30 players in the lowest tier (Tier 1). For each player to play against his/her 29 opponents
would take an inordinate amount of time. Instead, we propose that the 30 players be split into
three subsets of 10 players each in such a way that each subset has about the same average Elo
score.

   To illustrate how to do this, assume that the top three players in Tier 1 (i.e., the winners of
each of the three mini-tournaments in this tier) join 7 players in Tier 2 in a second and final
mini-tournament comprising 7+3 = 10 players. Altogether, there are 37 players:

   • Tier 1 winners: 3 winners of each of the Tier 1 subsets, who play 9 + 9 = 18 games in
Tier 1 and Tier 2.

   • Tier 1 losers: 30 – 3 = 27 players who play 9 games and are not the winners of their Tier
1 subsets.

   • Overall winner: Winner of the Tier 2 mini-tournament, who may be either an original
Tier 2 player, who plays 9 games, or one of the Tier 1 winners, who plays 9+9 = 18 games.

   Each player in Tier 1 has the same opportunity to win in this tier and move up to Tier 2,
whichever subset he/she is placed in, according to the following calculations for determining
the composition of each of the three Tier 1 subsets of 10 players each:

                       30!
   1. For the (30
               10
                 ) = 10!20! = 30,045,015 combinations (subsets) of 10 players each,

determine the single subset whose 10 members come closest to having the same average Elo
score as that of all 30 Tier 1 players (ties can be broken randomly). Thereby we identify which
                                                                                                                        10


of the approximately 30 million subsets of 10 players each is closest to having the same
average Elo score as that of all Tier 1 players (ties can be broken randomly):6

                                                                                                  20!
        2. With this subset of 10 players determined, for the remaining (20
                                                                         10
                                                                           ) = 10!10! =

184,756 combinations (subsets), identify the single subset whose 10 members come closest to
having the same average Elo score as all 30 Tier 1 players.

        3. Because the first two subsets each has about the same average Elo score as all 30 Tier 1
players, its last remaining subset of 10 players must also have about the same average Elo
score.

        Thereby we identify three Tier 1 subsets of 10 players that each have approximately the
same average TSiJ’s. Hence, our matching algorithm precludes any Tier 1 player from feeling
discriminated against because he/she faces a higher level of competition in his/her 9 matches
than would occur if he/she were in a different Tier 1 subset.7

        Recall that we did not need the subset-selection algorithm in Example 1, because in each
of the three tiers there were only 8 players, so the players in each tier could play against all
others in the tier. In Example 2, this was not true for the 30 players in Tier 1, so we showed
how to construct three homogeneous subsets of 10 players each that were equally competitive.
Elo scores of players were used for this purpose, and they could be used again if too many
players remain in contention in higher tiers to permit each player to play against every other.




6
    To be sure, 30 million is a large number but not beyond the ability of present-day computers to determine
which subset(s) come closest to having the same average Elo rating as all Tier 1 players.
7
    This is a slight exaggeration, illustrated by the subset in which the player (say, A) with the highest Tier 1 Elo
score appears. A will face a bit lower average level of competition than any player in the other two 10-member
subsets, because A’s Elo score pushes down the average score of the other 9 members of his/her subset. But if
this player has a bit of a competitive advantage in his/her subset than players with lower Elo scores do in other
subsets, this seems appropriate because they are the top players in their subsets, just as Tier 2 players enjoy an
advantage by immediately being placed in Tier 2.
                                                                                                            11


       But it is TS’s that determine who advances in a tournament. We believe that Elo scores
should be used only to determine who, initially, gets placed in what tiers and—if the numbers
in a higher-level tier are too great to permit each player to play against every other—to
construct equally competitive subsets in that tier. In summary, an advancement from these
subsets depends only on TS’s, not Elo scores.

      It is worth noting some concerns that real-life tournaments have raised. Perfect color
fairness—whereby each player plays an equal number of games as Black and as White—is
not always achievable, especially in tournaments with an odd number of rounds.
      Even in tournaments with an even number of rounds, color fairness is not always
satisfiable. For instance, in the 2023 FIDE Grand Swiss, which is one of the most prestigious
Swiss chess tournaments, 9 of the top 10 finishers played one more game as White than as
Black (6 vs. 5) (https://chess-results.com/tnr793016.aspx). A similar pattern was observed in
the 2023 FIDE Women’s Grand Swiss tournament (https://chess-results.com/tnr793017.aspx).

      To see the effects of color imbalance on the outcomes in top-level Swiss tournaments, we
analyzed the Grand Swiss and Grand Prix events organized by FIDE between 2017 and 2023.8
These tournaments are of utmost importance in order to qualify for the Candidates
Tournament, which determines the challenger for the world championship. We find a
significant bias favoring the players who had an extra White game. Of the seven players who
qualified for the Candidates Tournament from these events, six (86%) played at least one more
game as White. Moreover, 66% of the top 10 finishers in all tournaments had an extra White
game. These findings are consistent with White’s historically higher win percentage in elite
events, as reported in Brams and Ismail (2021).

      Another concern of Swiss tournaments has been the varying strength of players, based on
their Elo scores, in matches. In some cases, losing in the first-round game can lead to weaker
opponents in subsequent rounds. The winner of the FIDE Grand Swiss 2023 not only had an


8
    The tournaments include Grand Swiss tournaments in 2023, 2021, and 2019 and Grand Prix tournaments in
Sharjah, Moscow, Geneva, and Palma in 2017. We excluded previous Grand Prix tournaments that used the
knockout format. As above, we have collected the data from https://chess-results.com.
                                                                                                12


additional game as White but also faced the weakest average opposition among the top five
players, in part due to losing his first-round game (https://chess-results.com/tnr793016.aspx).
Although the eventual winner’s performance was undoubtedly exceptional, such small
advantages can add up to influence the selection of the top two players, who qualify for the
Candidates Tournament.
   To what extent are Multi-Tier Tournaments vulnerable to manipulation? For example, can
a player benefit by deliberately losing or drawing against an opponent in order to be paired
against weaker opponents in later rounds? Such an attempt at selective pairing is known as the
“Swiss Gambit,” perhaps because it was perfected in Swiss tournaments.
   In Multi-Tier Tournaments, because it is always preferable to have a greater Elo score in
order to enter a Multi-Tier tournament at a higher level, players have no incentive to lower
their Elo scores by losing or drawing. Neither do they have an incentive to deliberately lose in
a mini-tournament, because this lowers their TS’s and hurts their chances of moving to a
higher tier and, possibly, winning the tournament.
   Another form of manipulation is for a player to withdraw from a tournament after pairings
are announced to avoid playing against a player whom he/she thinks might beat or draw
against him/her. This tactic is obviated by the difficulty of being able to anticipate one’s
opponents, even in Tier 1, because this may depend on the subset to which the matching
algorithm assigns each player.
   One way of countering such tactics is to impose hefty penalties for withdrawing in the
middle of a tournament. But fines alone might not deter a top player like Leiner Dominguez,
who in 2023 quit after two draws in an open tournament in Spain, saying that “I’ve come to a
point where I’m simply risking too much if I continue [and lose or draw against a lower-rated
player]” (https://www.chess.com/news/view/dominguez-quits-sitges-wesley-so-firouzja-
candidates).
   In a Multi-Tier Tournament, a highly rated player like Dominguez is assured that he will
start against players mostly at his level. However, there may still be uncertainty about
Dominguez’s specific opponents if subsets are chosen in the manner we described, rendering
uncertain whom he will play against if there is more than one subset in his tier. Nevertheless,
he can rest assured that his opponents will be at roughly his level or have proved themselves
by advancing to a high level in the tournament.
                                                                                                              13


      Another issue is the timing of matches. Under the Swiss system, matches for each round
cannot be finalized until all games in the current round are completed. Because chess games
are often lengthy, players may remain uninformed about their next opponents until late the
evening before they play.
      This uncertainty impacts players’ ability to prepare. Players who can afford extensive
support teams, including seconds and coaches, are at an advantage compared to those who
must manage their preparation themselves.9 Furthermore, this lack of early pairing
information hinders television and online coverage, because broadcasters are unable to plan in
advance for broadcasting key matchups that can attract fan viewership.
      Our approach offers the following benefits:

   1. Perfect or near-perfect White-Black color balance: If there is an even number of rounds,
        all players play Black and White the same number of times; if an odd number, all
        players play one color no more than one more round than the other.

   2. Grouping of players into tiers with the most similar Elo ratings.

   3. Prevention of two consecutive games with the same color.

       We think our rules for matching and scoring players ensure a fair and comprehensive
assessment of the players’ performance in each mini-tournament, independent of the players’
Elo ratings in their tier. They ensure that almost all players can be strictly ranked, even if their
TSiJ’s are the same, so there will be almost no doubt about who the few players are who move
up to compete at the next-higher tier. Similarly, there will almost aways be a single winner of
the last mini-tournament and, therefore, of the entire tournament.




  9
      In chess, a second is a strong player assisting a player mainly during a tournament, focusing on analyzing
opponents, preparing opening strategies, and offering psychological support. A coach, on the other hand, is
involved in long-term training, working on a player’s overall game, teaching new concepts, and improving a
player’s tactical and strategic understanding.
                                                                                                    14


   4. Application of Multi-Tier Tournaments to Top 20 Chess Players



   In Table 1, we list the top 20 active chess players, based on their Elo ratings as of
February 2024. As in Example 1, we divide players into three tiers: Initially, Tier 1 comprises
the 8 players at ranks 1-8; Tier 2 comprises the 6 players at ranks 10-14; Tier 3 comprises the
6 players at ranks 15-20. Later, the two highest scorers in Tiers 1 and 2 move up, respectively,
to Tiers 2 and 3, who then each have 8 members who compete against each other.



                             Table 1. Elo Ratings of the Top 20 Players

   Rank        Name                  Rating   Rank      Name                           Rating
   1           M. Carlsen            2830     11        R. Praggnanandhaa              2747
   2           F. Caruana            2804     12        Vidit G.                       2747
   3           H. Nakamura           2788     13        N. Abdusattorov                2744
   4           Ding L.               2762     14        Gukesh D.                      2743
   5           A. Giri               2762     15        V. Keymer                      2738
   6           A. Firouzja           2760     16        A. Erigaisi                    2738
   7           I. Nepomniachtchi     2758     17        M. Vachier-Lagrave (MVL)       2732
   8           W. So                 2757     18        J.-K. Duda                     2732
   9           Wei Y.                2755     19        L. Aronian                     2725
   10          L. Dominguez          2752     20        S. Mamedyarov                  2722




       Like Example 1, there is no need to construct fair subsets of players, because each of the
8 players in each tier can play against every one of the 7 other players in its tier to determine
which 2 players move up to a higher tier. But unlike Example 1, the number of games played
by each member of a tier against others in it is not 1, as in Multi-Tier Tournaments, but may
vary radically, from 0 (there are seven pairs of players who play no games against each other)
to 71, as in the case of the Carlsen (#1) - Aronian (#19) pair (Carlsen won 12, lost 8, and drew
51 games against Aronian).
                                                                                                 15


    It was not appropriate to calculate, for each tier, TSiJ of player i against all other players
J in his/her/tier, because this measure is too much influenced by the outlier pairs in a tier,
especially those pairs which happen to play many games against each other (perhaps because
they are geographically proximate or are invited to, and choose to participate in, many
tournaments). To remedy the problem of combining the wins, draws, and losses of such pairs
with those pairs playing far fewer games, we define TA differently from how we did so in
section 2.



    For every two players, A and B, in a tier, we calculate A’s TS in his/her tier as follows:


                           # of 𝐴 wins against 𝐵 − # of 𝐵 wins against 𝐴
                  𝑇𝑆𝐴𝐵 =                                                 ,
                                  # games played between 𝐴 and 𝐵



with 𝑇𝑆𝐴𝐵 = 0 if A and B did not play any games. We illustrate the aggregation problem if we
had used the formula for TS in section 2, TSiJ (where subscript J indicates all opponents of i).
Assume A plays a large number of games against B but many fewer games against the other 6
players, C, D, E, F, G, and H. In that case, the AB pair would have had an unduly large effect
when we sum all the wins, draws and losses of A’s opponents, including B, using TSiJ.



    But if we first normalize values of TS between -1 and +1 for each of A’s opponents, as
𝑇𝑆𝐴𝐵 does, their summation does not give unduly large weight to the AB pair. Then, taking
the average of TSAB through TSAH, we obtain a summary measure of how, hypothetically, A
would do against all his/her opponents in his/her tier, but now based on varying numbers of
games A has played against his/her opponents over 20 years (see next paragraph)—instead of
just one game in a single tournament that never occurred.
                                                                                                                      16


    Table 2. A Three-Tiered Tournament with Top 20 Players Grouped into Three Tiers of
                             8, 6, and 6 Players, Based on Their Elo Ratingsa


     Rank          Tier 1              ̅̅̅̅
                                       𝑻𝑺               Tier 2               ̅̅̅̅
                                                                             𝑻𝑺             Tier 3           ̅̅̅̅
                                                                                                             𝑻𝑺
        1           MVL              0.192               MVL                 0.18         Carlsen*           0.22
        2         Aronian            0.191             Aronian              0.132        Nakamura            0.08
        3      Abdusattorov           0.10                So                0.129          Caruana           0.04
        4      Mamedyarov            0.041                Wei                0.00          Aronian          -0.03
        5         Erigaisi           0.040           Dominguez               0.00           MVL             -0.04
        6          Gukesh             -0.01        Nepomniachtchi           -0.07           Ding            -0.06
        7           Duda              -0.10        Praggnanandhaa           -0.17            Giri           -0.07
        8         Keymer              -0.46              Vidit              -0.20          Firouzja         -0.13
a
    Two new players (highlighted in bold), who have the greatest average TS’s in Tiers 1 and 2, are added first to
Tier 2 and then to Tier 3. The TS winners of each tier are the two players ranked at the top of each tier, with
Carlsen (starred), who starts in Tier 3, the winner of the tournament.



       We used head-to-head contest data from 1209 games—excluding so-called rapid and blitz
games that require somewhat different skills—that were played between May 2004 and
February 2024 that is available from the following website that archives historical chess
results (https://www.chessgames.com). Each matchup is based on an average of 14.4 games,
with Tier 1 players averaging 6.6 games against each other, Tier 2 players averaging 10.1
games against each other, and Tier 3 players averaging 26.4 games against each other.
Higher-ranked players tend to be older and are invited to more tournaments.10



       As Table 2 shows, MVL and Aronian have the greatest TS’s in both Tier 1 and 2. Hence,
they advance to Tier 3. Consistent with Carlsen’s dominance in chess for over ten years, he is
the clear winner in this Multi-Tier Tournament, with an average TS of 0.22 in Tier 3.
Nakamura and Caruana share the second and the third places, respectively. Notably, despite




10
     These are the average figures for each tier before winners from the lower tiers are added to the higher tiers.
                                                                                                17


starting the competition in the lowest tier, MVL and Aronian perform better than three Tier 3
players.



   5. Other Approaches to the Design of Fair Tournaments


   FIDE has approved several versions of Swiss tournaments, including the Dutch, Burstein,
Lim, and Dubov systems. These systems introduce changes to either the first-round pairing or
later-round pairings under the Swiss system. For example, the Dubov system uses the average
rating of the opponents to create pairings within the same score groups. However, this system
still relies on the current score to match players and unlike our system, it does not necessarily
improve the overall average of opponents’ ratings or other desired aspects of matches (for a
detailed overview, see Held, 2020). The most commonly used version is, in fact, the Dutch
system, which matches players based on Elo ratings for the first round and then uses the
players’ updated scores for following rounds. For instance, in a six-player tournament with
players ranked from 1 to 6, with 1 being the highest-rated, the first-round pairing would be 1–
4, 2–5, and 3–6 according to the Dutch system.


   While sharing similarities with league systems often used in sports like soccer, Multi-Tier
Tournaments differ in several key aspects. First, unlike leagues, which run simultaneously
over extended periods, Multi-Tier Tournaments progress sequentially within a single
timeframe so that the players in the lowest tier have an opportunity to win the entire event.
Second, leagues use a single or double round-robin format, whereas Multi-Tier Tournaments,
similar to Swiss tournaments, are mainly designed for tournaments with a large number of
players and a small number of rounds.


   Recently, UEFA updated the format for the Champions League. Similar to both Swiss and
Multi-Tier Tournaments, teams play fewer games than in a round-robin, and like Multi-Tier
Tournaments, the format incorporates a degree of fairness by having teams play half their
matches at home and half away. However, there are also key differences between this format
and Multi-Tier Tournaments. Multi-Tier Tournaments use cardinal Elo ratings for fairer
                                                                                                 18


pairing allocation, while UEFA uses a complex set of criteria, including random allocation
and ordinal rankings, to determine pairings. In addition, Multi-Tier Tournaments do not
include a knockout component, whereas the UEFA Champions League does.


   Various metrics to evaluate tournament success have been explored in the literature. Scarf
et al. (2009) analyzed UEFA Champions League formats via simulations and found the round-
robin to be the fairest in aligning pre- and post-tournament rankings. Similarly, Appleton
(1995) and Sziklai et al. (2022) conducted simulations to assess different tournament formats,
focusing on the win probability of the best teams and players. Key contributions in this field
also include Glenn (1960) and Searls (1963), who both focus on the probability of the best
players and teams winning in different tournament designs. As for Swiss tournaments,
Olafsson (1990) explored algorithmic properties of different tournament designs, whereas
Fuhrlich et al. (2021) and Sauer et al. (2024) proposed a Swiss-based pairing algorithm that
produced improvements over in properties, like color fairness, over FIDE’s Swiss systems.
For a review of the tournament design literature, see the recent survey by Devriesere et al.
(2024).


   Tournament ranking systems have been theoretically explored by several researchers.
Rubinstein (1980) axiomatized the standard points-based system, Csato (2017) studied Swiss
system chess team tournaments, and Arlegi and Dimitrov (2020) examined fairness in
knockout tournaments.


   Tiebreaking in tournaments typically follows two approaches. One involves a final contest
to resolve ties, as seen in tennis tiebreakers, soccer penalty shootouts, and some American
football overtime games. These methods, and their fairness, have been the subject of several
studies. Che and Hendershott (2008), Brams and Sanderson (2013), and Granot and Gerchak
(2014) focus on bidding to determine which team picks among different options. Additionally,
studies, for example, by Apesteguia and Palacios-Huerta (2010), Brams and Ismail (2018),
Brams et al. (2018), Cohen-Zada et al. (2018), and Anbarci et al. (2021) focus on determining
                                                                                                                19


a fairer ordering of play in tiebreak contests.11 The second approach analyses different rules
for tiebreaking in Swiss chess tournaments (Anbarci and Ismail, 2024) and the FIFA World
Cup group stage (Csato, 2021). For an overview of tiebreaking methods, see Csato (2023,
Chapter 1.3).
     The concept of strategyproofness, or incentive compatibility, in tournament rules has also
been a subject of interest. Selected contributions in this area include works by Pauly (2014),
Kendall and Lenten (2017), Brams et al. (2018), Dagaev and Sonin (2018), Csato (2019),
Csato (2021), Anbarci et al. (2021), and Guyon (2022).
     Finally, the literature on the maximum the number of consecutive games that can be
played as White or Black in tournaments dates back to De Werra (1981), who studied round-
robin soccer tournaments. In this context, playing at home is similar to playing as White, and
playing away is similar to playing as Black. For a review of the relevant results, see Goossens
and Spieksma (2012).



     6. Conclusions



     In contrast to Swiss tournaments, Multi-Tier Tournaments prioritize determining the
pairings as fairly as possible prior to the start of games in a tier. Moreover, Multi-Tier
Tournaments minimize, and eliminate whenever possible, biases related to the number of
games played as White and Black (color fairness) and the number of consecutive games with
each color (psychological fairness).

     We showed how Multi-Tier Tournaments group players into tiers, and even within tiers,
fairly. They also ensure that lower-rated players are afforded the opportunity to advance
through the tiers, based on their performance. At the same time, they give a break to higher-
rated players by allowing them to advance by playing fewer games.

     Compared to knockout tournaments, where a single loss results in elimination, Multi-Tier
Tournaments allow for a player’s loss in one game to be countered by his/her winning in


11
  For further empirical analysis of the first-mover advantage in penalty shootouts, see Kocher et al. (2012),
Arrondel et al. (2019), Rudi et al. (2020), and Kassis et al. (2021).
                                                                                                     20


subsequent games. Although our application focused on chess, Multi-Tier Tournaments are
applicable to other games and sports where Elo or other scoring methods are used, including
tennis, soccer, and the big three of American sports—baseball, basketball, and football.

   In fact, one may consider a season of play in a sport like baseball a tournament of sorts,
wherein teams play about the same number of games against teams in their league over the
course of a season. Their records in these leagues determine which teams go into the playoffs,
which might be considered mini-tournaments themselves, requiring winning, for example, 2
out of 3, 3 out of 5, or 4 out of 7 games.

   In most sports leagues, the number of games that teams player over a regular season does
not depend on how they are rated (it is different leagues that reflect different levels of skill).
Only in the playoffs are the numbers narrowed down, as in Multi-Tier Tournaments, when the
best-performing teams or players ascend to higher tiers as poorer teams are eliminated. Multi-
Tier Tournaments show how this competition can be structured in a fair and systematic way.
                                                                                             21


                                          References

Anbarci, Nejat, and Mehmet S Ismail. 2024. “AI-powered Mechanisms as Judges: Breaking
    Ties in Chess.” PLOS One, forthcoming.

Anbarci, Nejat, Ching-Jen Sun, and M Utku Unver. 2021. “Designing practical and fair¨
    sequential team contests: The case of penalty shootouts.” Games and Economic Behavior
    130:25–43.
Apesteguia, Jose, and Ignacio Palacios-Huerta. 2010. “Psychological pressure in competitive
    environments: Evidence from a randomized natural experiment.” American Economic
    Review 100 (5): 2548–64.

Appleton, David R. 1995. “May the Best Man Win?” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society
    Series D: The Statistician 44 (4): 529–538.

Arlegi, Ritxar, and Dinko Dimitrov. 2020. “Fair elimination-type competitions.” European
    Journal of Operational Research 287 (2): 528–535. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/
    10.1016/j.ejor.2020.03.025.

Arrondel, L., Duhautois, R., and Laslier, J. F. (2019). Decision under psychological pressure:
    The shooter's anxiety at the penalty kick. Journal of Economic Psychology, 70, 22–35.

Brams, Steven J, and Mehmet S Ismail. 2018. “Making the Rules of Sports Fairer.” SIAM
    Review 60 (1): 181–202.
       . 2021. “Fairer Chess: A Reversal of Two Opening Moves in Chess Creates Balance
     Between White and Black.” In 2021 IEEE Conference on Games (CoG), 1–4. IEEE.
Brams, Steven J, Mehmet S Ismail, D Marc Kilgour, and Walter Stromquist. 2018. “Catch-
    Up: A Rule That Makes Service Sports More Competitive.” American Mathematical
    Monthly 125 (9): 771–796.
Brams, Steven J., and Zachary N. Sanderson. 2013. “Why you shouldn’t use a toss for
    overtime.” +Plus Magazine, https://plus.maths.org/content/toss-overtime.
Che, Yeon-Koo, and Terrence Hendershott. 2008. “How to divide the possession of a
    football?” Economics Letters 99 (3): 561–565. https:
    //doi.org/10.1016/j.econlet.2007.10.013
                                                                                            22


Cohen-Zada, Danny, Alex Krumer, and Offer Moshe Shapir. 2018. “Testing the effect of
    serve order in tennis tiebreak.” Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 146:106–
    115.
Csato, Laszlo. 2017. “On the ranking of a Swiss system chess team tournament.” Annals of
    Operations Research 254 (1-2): 17–36.
       . 2019. “UEFA Champions League entry has not satisfied strategyproofness in three
    seasons.” Journal of Sports Economics 20 (7): 975–981.

       . 2021. Tournament Design: How Operations Research Can Improve Sports Rules.
    Springer Nature.

       . 2023. “How to avoid uncompetitive games? The importance of tie-breaking rules.”
    European Journal of Operational Research 307 (3): 1260–1269.
Dagaev, Dmitry, and Konstantin Sonin. 2018. “Winning by Losing: Incentive Incompatibility
    in Multiple Qualifiers.” Journal of Sports Economics 19 (8): 1122–1146.

Devriesere, Karel, László Csató, and Dries Goossens. 2024. “Tournament design: A review
    from an operational research perspective.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.05034.

De Werra, Dominique. 1981. Scheduling in sports. In Hansen, P., editor, Studies on Graphs
    and Discrete Programming, volume 11 of Annals of Discrete Mathematics, pages 381–
    395. North-Holland, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Elo, Arpad E. 1978. The Rating of Chess Players, Past and Present. New York: Arco
    Publishing.

Fuhrlich, Pascal, Agnes Cseh, and Pascal Lenzner. 2022. “Improving Ranking Quality and
    Fairness in Swiss-System Chess Tournaments.” In Proceedings of the 23rd ACM
    Conference on Economics and Computation, 1101–1102. EC’22. Boulder, CO, USA:
    Association for Computing Machinery
Glenn, WA. 1960. “A Comparison of the Effectiveness of Tournaments.” Biometrika 47 (3/4):
    253–262.
Goossens, Dries R., and Spieksma, Frits C. 2012. Soccer schedules in Europe: An
    overview. Journal of Scheduling, 15, 641–651.
                                                                                              23


Granot, Daniel, and Yigal Gerchak. 2014. “An auction with positive externality and possible
    application to overtime rules in football, soccer, and chess.” Operations Research Letters
    42 (1): 12–15. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j. orl.2013.11.001
Guyon, Julien. 2022. “‘Choose your opponent’: A new knockout design for hybrid
    tournaments.” Journal of Sports Analytics 8 (1): 9–29.

Held, Mario, and Swiss Dubov. 2020. “A Comparison Between Swiss Pairing Systems..
     https://spp.fide.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/11/Dubov-vs-FIDE-Swiss.pdf. Accessed:
     2023-11-24.
Kassis, Mark, Sascha L. Schmidt, Dominik Schreyer, and Matthias Sutter. 2021.
     “Psychological Pressure and the Right to Determine the Moves in Dynamic Tournaments
     – Evidence from a Natural Field Experiment.” Games and Economic Behavior 126
     (March): 771–796.
Kendall, Graham, and Liam J.A. Lenten. 2017. “When sports rules go awry.” European
    Journal of Operational Research 257 (2): 377–394. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/
    10.1016/j.ejor.2016.06.050.

Kocher, Martin G., Marc V. Lenz, and Matthias Sutter. 2012. “Psychological Pressure in
     Competitive Environments: New Evidence from Randomized Natural Experiments.”
     Management Science 58 (8): 1585–91.
Lambers, Roel, and Frits C. R. Spieksma. 2021. “A Mathematical Analysis of Fairness in
    Shootouts.” IMA Journal of Management Mathematics 32 (4): 411–24.
Olafsson, Snjolfur. 1990. “Weighted Matching in Chess Tournaments.” Journal of the
    Operational Research Society 41 (1): 17–24.
Pauly, Marc. 2014. “Can strategizing in round-robin subtournaments be avoided?” Social
    Choice and Welfare 43 (1): 29–46.

Rubinstein, Ariel. 1980. “Ranking the participants in a tournament.” SIAM Journal on Applied
    Mathematics 38 (1): 108–111.
Rudi, Nils, Marcelo Olivares, and Adity Shetty. 2020. “Ordering Sequential Competitions to
    Reduce Order Relevance: Soccer Penalty Shootouts.” PLOS One 15 (12): 1–11.
                                                                                           24


Sauer, Pascal, Cseh, Ágnes and Lenzner, Pascal. 2024. "Improving ranking quality and fairness
    in Swiss-system chess tournaments." Journal of Quantitative Analysis in Sports, 20 (2):
    127–146.

Scarf, Philip, Muhammad Mat Yusof, and Mark Bilbao. 2009. “A numerical study of designs
    for sporting contests.” European Journal of Operational Research 198 (1): 190–198.
Searls, Donald T. 1963. “On the probability of winning with different tournament
    procedures.” Journal of the American Statistical Association 58 (304): 1064–1081.
Sziklai, Balázs R., Péter Biró, and László Csató. 2022. “The efficacy of tournament
    designs.” Computers & Operations Research 144: 105821.
