[2408.10867] Bye-Bye, Bye Advantage: Estimating the competitive impact of rest differential in the National Football League \correspondance \extraAuth Bye-Bye, Bye Advantage: Estimating the competitive impact of rest differential in the National Football League Michael J. Lopez 1,∗ and Thompson Bliss 2 Address: Abstract 1 The National Football League (NFL) sets its regular season schedule to optimize viewership and minimize competitive inequities. One inequity assumed to impact team performance is rest differential, defined as the relative number of days between games. Using Bayesian state space models on both game outcomes and betting market data, we estimate the competitive effect of rest differential in American football. We find that the most commonly referred to inequities – both the bye week rest advantage and the mini-bye week rest advantage – currently show no significant evidence of providing the rested team a competitive edge. Further, we trace a decline in the advantage of a bye week to a 2011 change to the NFL’s Collective Bargaining Agreement, which represents a natural experiment to test the relevance of rest and preparation in football. Prior to the agreement, NFL teams off a bye week received a significant advantage (+2.2 points per game), but since 2011, that benefit has been mitigated. \helveticabold 2 Keywords: Bayesian modeling, NFL, rest differential, state space, natural experiment † † firstpage: 1 3 Introduction In 2023, 93 of the top 100 United States television broadcasts were National Football League (NFL) games, with 83 stemming from the league’s regular season ( sched93 ) . The schedule for this regular season is set in the spring, and is the culmination of a months-long process that analyzes, among other factors, rest and travel, stadium availability, and team interest. One challenge in setting the schedule each year is the myriad possibilities. Even though an individual team currently plays just 17 games each regular season, those games can be assigned in roughly one billion ways. For all 32 teams, roughly a quadrillion combinations are possible ( scheduleqa ) . The NFL reduces the population of potential schedules by eliminating games and strings of games that are perceived as too unfair ( karwan2015alleviating ; sched0 ) . One factor examined in this process is rest differential, broadly defined as the comparison of the relative number of days in between games among two competing teams. Differences in rest could impact, among other factors, recovery time, preparation, injury risk, and travel. In a league with only 17 games, where one win can be the difference between making the playoffs and staying at home, giving one team an unbalanced set of rest differentials could be considered an unfair advantage. As a result, media and fans frequently track how their favorite teams’ rest differential stacks up each year ( sched1 ; sched2 ; sched3 ) . NFL games are most commonly played on Thursday (usually one game, Thursday Night Football, or TNF), Sunday (several games, usually split between 1:00 EST, 4:00 EST, and night), and Monday (usually one game, Monday Night Football, or MNF). 1 1 1 Additional gamedays can include major American holidays like Thanksgiving and Christmas, as well as unique one-off games or sets of games on Friday’s and Saturday’s. If both teams played the week before, a given team could enter with a rest differential of plus or minus four days (one team played Monday, the other Thursday), plus or minus three days (Thursday, Sunday), plus or minus one day (Sunday, Monday), or no rest difference (teams played the same day). But in addition to the weekly differences, each team receives one bye week each regular season. This results in rest differentials as large as plus or minus 8 days. The largest perceived advantage is the bye-week benefit (+6 to +8 days). However, league guidelines have varied over the last two decades whether or not teams can practice during that time period. Specifically, the 2011 Collective Bargaining Agreement (CBA) eliminated practice time during bye weeks by guaranteeing four days off for players ( nflcba ) . What had been two potential weeks of practice for a game before 2011 turned into one week of practice after 2011. As a result, 2011 represents an inflection point for us to test the competitive impact of the bye. In other words, does body rest and time off provide players a rest differential benefit in the NFL? Or is it the extra practice time that, prior to 2011, came alongside bye weeks? Arguably, the perception of a rest differential impact in the NFL outweighs the evidence. Both sung2014national and sung2020national found that the bye week provided a competitive advantage that had not yet been picked up in betting markets. However, in neither paper was there a comparison pre and post CBA. Post 2011, murray2018examining identified that home teams with a one-day MNF disadvantage lost more often than expected, while finding no benefit to a bye advantage. Finally, karwan2021analyzing tied the 2011 CBA change to a decrease in the impact of rest for the home team. However, relative rest was not explicitly modeled. Additionally, karwan2021analyzing used the betting market point spread as an explanatory variable in models of point differential, which would conceal the effect of rest differential if betting markets already accounted for it. The most well known advocacy’s for the competitive impact of rest differences are sharp23 and sharp24 . However, these analyses are ripe with small sample sizes, anecdotal evidence (e.g, identifying an under-performing team with negative rest differential), selective endpoints (e.g, only including certain weeks of the season or team types), and the over-interpretation of non-significant results. The negative competitive impacts of rest differential are more well established in the National Basketball Association (NBA) (as examples, see esteves2021basketball ; yang2021influence ; charest2021impacts ; cook2022associations ; bowman2023schedule ). In fact, the inadequate rest associated with the NBA schedule had several experts wanting the league to better balance player sleep as it sets its schedule ( singh2021urgent ) . In an interview in June of 2024, NBA executive Evan Wasch was direct, stating ‘we do see a performance decline in the second night of back-to-back games’ ( nbarest ) . Similarly, National Hockey League teams with worst rest differential scored fewer standings points ( hockey1 ; hockey2 ) , with part of the drop arguably due to a drop in save percentages for goalies playing on zero days rest ( hockey3 ) . In professional soccer, scoppa2015fatigue found that in the current structure of national team tournaments, different days of rest were not correlated with performance. Related, watanabe2017weather found that rest differential was not a significant predictor of team performance in the 2014 World Cup. Altogether, there is limited research that directly ties NFL game outcomes to rest differential, and what does exist tends to ignore the 2011 CBA change. Additionally, there are no known looks at betting market odds with respect to the relative point value of rest differential. Betting market numbers offer an important alternative to using game outcomes; in expectation, the point spread will account for all publicly known information prior to a contest, including team strength, game location, and relative rest. As a result, across sport and time, the efficiency of betting market odds is well established (as examples, see harville1980 , lacey1990estimation , lopez2015building ). Thus, we posit that betting markets will yield more precise estimates of team strength in order to isolate rest differential impact. Finally, simple inefficiencies in betting markets are unlikely to last ( vandenbruaene2022efficient ) , making it more likely than not that modern NFL betting markets incorporate rest differential into their numbers. The aim of our paper is to estimate the impact of rest differential in the NFL using modern statistical approaches that can account for team strength. Additionally, we assess if the bye rest benefit changed after the 2011 CBA. We use Bayesian state-space models with time-varying team strength estimates ( glickman2017 ; lopez2018 ) on two outcomes: point differential and point spread. Our findings suggest that the bye-week advantage existed prior to 2011 (+2.2 points per game), but that most of the bye-week benefit was mitigated after the 2011 CBA (best estimate since 2011, +0.3 points per game). Additionally, while the mini-bye advantage offers no obvious benefit in either game or betting market outcomes, betting markets believe that there is a small advantage to facing an opponent who played the previous Monday night. Our paper is laid out as follows. Section 4 proposes state space models of rest differential, while Section 4.1 details our results. Section concludes and extrapolates the findings to other sports. 4 Materials and Methods 4.1 Methods The NFL disproportionately allocates prime time slots each season based on which teams are most likely to compete for a championship. Stronger teams receive as many as five or six prime time slots, while lesser teams may only get one or two. 2 2 2 For example, the 2023 Super Bowl participants have a combined 11 prime time games in the 2024 regular season (Kansas City 5, San Francisco 6), while the Carolina Panthers (who finished with a record of 2-15 in 2023) have 0. As a result, assessing the impact of rest on NFL game outcomes requires accounting for team strength. Additionally, not all rest discrepancies are treated equivalently for the home and away teams; for example, roughly 60 percent of teams playing the week after a Monday Night Football game play at home. Thus, any estimate of rest differential also requires accounting for the home advantage. State-space models ( glickman1998 ; glickman2017 ; lopez2018 ) incorporate time-varying estimates of team strength in statistical models of game outcomes, while likewise accounting for the home advantage. These models are extensions of the more well-known paired comparison models ( bradley1952rank ) . Using simulations, benz2023estimating identified paired comparison models as the framework most robust for estimating home advantages, suggesting that those models would likewise be appropriate for modeling rest advantages. In the sections below, we use the state space framework to model game outcomes as a function of team strength, the home advantage, and various categories of rest differential. 4.1.1 State Space Models of team strength Let Y s , i ​ j Y_{s,ij} be the point differential of a contest between home team i i and away team j j during season s s . In our notation, i , j = 1 , … ​ 32 i,j=1,...32 , and represent each of the NFL’s current 32 franchises. We use season s s , for s = 2002 , … ​ 2023 s=2002,...2023 . The mean outcome E ⁡ [ Y s , i ​ j ] E[Y_{s,ij}] between i i and j j during season s s is defined broadly as E ⁡ [ Y s , i ​ j ] = θ s , i − θ s , j + μ H ​ A , s , \displaystyle E[Y_{s,ij}]=\theta_{s,i}-\theta_{s,j}+\mu_{HA,s}, where θ s , i \theta_{s,i} and θ s , j \theta_{s,j} represent team strength parameters for teams i i and j j in season s s , and μ H ​ A , s \mu_{HA,s} is our home advantage specification, such that μ H ​ A , s = ( α H ​ A ​ T ​ r ​ e ​ n ​ d × s + α H ​ A ​ I ​ n ​ t ​ e ​ r ​ c ​ e ​ p ​ t ) × I ⁡ ( H ​ A ) \mu_{HA,s}=(\alpha_{HA\ Trend}\times s+\alpha_{HA\ Intercept})\times I(HA) . Here, home advantage is treated linearly, given the results of benz2024comprehensive , who found a linear home advantage trend provided a better fit relative to constant and categorical alternatives. In this notation, I ⁡ ( H ​ A ) I(HA) is an indicator for if home team i i actually has a home advantage. From 2002-2023, 65 games were played at neutral sites, due to either international games or bad weather. The team strength parameters, θ s , i \theta_{s,i} and θ s , j \theta_{s,j} , reflect absolute measures of team ability, and translate into points above a league average team for i i and j j , respectively. Both measures vary stochastically by season. As in glickman1998 and lopez2018 , we assume that, in expectation, team strength parameters are pulled towards 0 over time, where, for s ≥ 2003 s\geq 2003 and i = 1 , … ​ 32 i=1,...32 , θ ( s , i ) ∼ N ⁡ ( γ × θ ( s − 1 , i ) , σ teamstrength 2 ) . \displaystyle\theta_{(s,i)}\sim N(\gamma\times\theta_{(s-1,i)},\sigma_{\text{teamstrength}}^{2}). In this specification, γ \gamma is an autoregressive parameter for season-to-season variation, and σ teamstrength 2 \sigma_{\text{teamstrength}}^{2} is the variability in team strength. 4.1.2 State Space Models of rest difference With 4 to 15 days off between each game for each of the home and visiting teams, there are a multitude of potential rest specifications. We propose three categories – M ​ N ​ F MNF , the Monday Night Football advantage, M ​ i ​ n ​ i Mini , the mini-bye advantage, and B ​ y ​ e Bye , the advantage most often linked to a team playing off a bye week - in order to build models to estimate rest effects. Our full split of games into these categories is shown in Table . (Table here) First, our M ​ N ​ F MNF advantage refers to games in which (i) there’s at least a one day rest differential between the two teams and (ii) the disadvantaged team is playing on six days rest or less. Usually, the M ​ N ​ F MNF advantage refers to a Sunday game, where one team played the prior Sunday and the other played the prior Monday. Additionally, there other are games where this M ​ N ​ F MNF definition is met, including Saturday to Saturday vs. Sunday to Saturday matchups. Second, our M ​ i ​ n ​ i Mini advantage refers to games in which both (i) exactly one team had either 9, 10, or 11 days rest and (ii) there was at least a two day difference in rest between the two teams. Usually, the M ​ i ​ n ​ i Mini advantage refers to teams playing on Thursday Night Football who return 10 days later to face an opponent playing on seven days rest. There are additional scenarios noted in Table . Finally, the B ​ y ​ e Bye advantage refers to teams that did not play the previous week against an opponent that did play the previous week. Generally, these differences are +6 to +8 days. In all situations, these teams are coming off the one regular season bye week given to each NFL team. There are a handful of games under unique rest scenarios that we drop from our analysis. These are largely rescheduled games (e.g, COVID in 2020, or games postponed because of weather), many of which were played mid-week, thus creating rare rest discrepancies. More importantly, these settings reflect other disruptions for teams, including illness and/or travel, thus making it difficult to extrapolate to the typical NFL calendar. As a final point, we prefer categorical specifications of rest to continuous ones for several reasons. First, the potential impact of rest difference is directly tied to practice and recovery time. As an example, the difference between 13 and 14 days rest (+1 day) is less likely to be impactful than the difference between six and seven days rest (also +1 day). Within each of our three specifications, there is similarity in practice time, days off, and travel, an assertion not always true among teams with the same difference in rest days alone. Further, the NFL calendar lends itself to a three groupings of rest difference, with large spikes at +/-1 day, +/-3 days, and +/- 7 days difference. Alternatively, zero NFL games in our sample were played with a rest difference of 5 days. Let I ⁡ ( M ​ N ​ F ) I(MNF) , I ⁡ ( M ​ i ​ n ​ i ) I(Mini) , and I ⁡ ( B ​ y ​ e ) I(Bye) be indicators for whether or not the home team i i (shown by I ⁡ ( ⋅ ) = 1 I(\cdot)=1 ) or visiting team j j (shown by OPEN I ⁡ ( ⋅ ) = − 1 ) I(\cdot)=-1) have the rest advantage in a given game corresponding to Monday Night Football ( M ​ N ​ F MNF ), mini-bye ( M ​ i ​ n ​ i Mini ) and bye week ( B ​ y ​ e Bye ), respectively. For example, if team i i has 10 days rest and team j j has 7 days rest, I ⁡ ( M ​ N ​ F ) = 0 I(MNF)=0 , I ⁡ ( M ​ i ​ n ​ i ) = 1 I(Mini)=1 , and I ⁡ ( B ​ y ​ e ) = 0 I(Bye)=0 . Alternatively, if team i i has 7 days rest and team j j has 10 days rest, I ⁡ ( M ​ N ​ F ) = 0 I(MNF)=0 , I ⁡ ( M ​ i ​ n ​ i ) = − 1 I(Mini)=-1 , and I ⁡ ( B ​ y ​ e ) = 0 I(Bye)=0 . Rest differential terms are assumed to be symmetric; e.g, the net benefit for a home team to a certain rest category is equivalent to had that same rest benefit been given to the visiting team. Additionally, rest terms are not mutually exclusive, such that if Team i i played the previous Monday (e.g, six days rest) and Team j j is off a bye, I ⁡ ( M ​ N ​ F ) = − 1 I(MNF)=-1 and I ⁡ ( B ​ y ​ e ) = − 1 I(Bye)=-1 . The three indicator values for each combination of home and away rest days are also provided in Table . Model uses each of the three rest terms in modeling Y s , i ​ j Y_{s,ij} from 2002 to 2023, such that Conversion to HTML had a Fatal error and exited abruptly. This document may be truncated or damaged. ◄ Feeling lucky? Conversion report Report an issue View&nbsp;original on&nbsp;arXiv ► Copyright Privacy Policy Generated by L a T e XML oxide