      Towards Nation-wide Analytical Healthcare
   Infrastructures: A Privacy-Preserving Augmented
            Knee Rehabilitation Case Study

       Boris Bačić1,2 ,3[0000−0003−0305−4322] , Claudiu Vasile1[0009-0008-5837-3180],
     Chengwei Feng1,2[0009-0002-4858-6226] and Marian G. Ciucă4[0009-0006-7634-2594]
                       1
                          AUT University, Auckland, New Zealand
        2
          Institute of Biomedical Technologies (IBTec), Auckland, New Zealand
3
  Sports Performance Research Institute New Zealand (SPRINZ), Auckland, New Zealand
                        4
                          Ovidius University of Constanta, Romania
                              boris.bacic@aut.ac.nz



          Abstract. The purpose of this paper is to contribute towards the near-
      future privacy-preserving big data analytical healthcare platforms, capable
      of processing streamed or uploaded timeseries data or videos from patients.
      The experimental work includes a real-life knee rehabilitation video dataset
      capturing a set of exercises from simple and personalised to more general
      and challenging movements aimed for returning to sport. To convert video
      from mobile into privacy-preserving diagnostic timeseries data, we em-
      ployed Google MediaPipe pose estimation. The developed proof-of-concept
      algorithms can augment knee exercise videos by overlaying the patient with
      stick figure elements while updating generated timeseries plot with knee
      angle estimation streamed as CSV file format. For patients and physiother-
      apists, video with side-to-side timeseries visually indicating potential issues
      such as excessive knee flexion or unstable knee movements or stick figure
      overlay errors is possible by setting a-priori knee-angle parameters. To ad-
      dress adherence to rehabilitation programme and quantify exercise sets and
      repetitions, our adaptive algorithm can correctly identify (91.67%–100%) of
      all exercises from side- and front-view videos. Transparent algorithm de-
      sign for adaptive visual analysis of various knee exercise patterns contrib-
      utes towards the interpretable AI and will inform near-future privacy-
      preserving, non-vendor locking, open-source developments for both end-
      user computing devices and as on-premises non-proprietary cloud platforms
      that can be deployed within the national healthcare system.


      Keywords: AI, Exercise Monitoring, Pose Estimation, Neuro Rehabilita-
      tion, Accident Compensation Corporation (ACC) New Zealand.


"A healthy person has a thousand wishes, a sick person just one." – the known
proverb may come to mind when seeking rehabilitation after injury, stroke, recov-
ering from surgery or managing conditions of repetitive Occupational Overuse
2

Syndrome (OOS), or other neurological conditions. Rehabilitation specialists typi-
cally diagnose and provide follow-up sessions with interventions, all intended to
accelerate healing. As part of the intervention, there are mutual expectations of
physiotherapist and patient, including commitment to a personalised home exer-
cise programme, aimed at improving wellbeing, and shortening return-to-work or
return-to-sport times.


1      Introduction

For a small country with just over 5 million people, New Zealand’s “Physiothera-
py services revenue is expected to rise at an annualised 2.7% over the five years
through 2023-24, to total an estimated $519.2 million.” [1]. As the steady increase
in costs of medical and physiotherapy services is a global problem, the overarch-
ing question is: How can we use scientific and technological advancements to
enhance rehabilitation and help to inform the design of next-generation nation-
wide analytical infrastructures that should not be relying on third-party offshore
cloud services?
   Ever since the concept of telerehabilitation in the 1990s [2] and Microsoft’s
Kinect exergames from 2010s, the ideas combining augmented video interaction
to improve wellbeing through active movements, Internet videoconferencing and
more recently popular exercise mirrors are not new. Hence, for this research the
guiding question is: What related contexts, insights and artefacts from the present-
ed case study on knee rehabilitation may contribute to the near-future technology
advancements in adding value to rehabilitation processes and technology?
   Considering the prospect of the next-generation big data analytical healthcare
platforms able to capture and process video and data streams, the need for digital
equality of end-users computing devices, the objectives of this research are
aligned with the following research questions:
   1. How can we use near-obsolete end-user computing devices to capture and
      optionally process rehabilitation data for promoting patients’ compliance and
      adherence factors [3,2]?
   2. To what extent Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Computer Vision (CV):
      - are needed for the reported knee rehabilitation case study?
      - could be applied to extended sets of knee exercises potentially transferra-
         ble to more general neuromotor rehabilitation for both end-user compu-
         ting and healthcare platforms?


2      Methods and Materials

Combining sport science and AI methodologies, the three-phase multidisciplinary
approach involves analysis and recommendations: (1) Considering the nature of
injury, rehabilitation process, movement goals, and recommended physical reha-
bilitation exercises [4]; (2) Bridging biomechanics and AI by: identifying common
                                                                                              3

properties of the movement, common errors [4], to be matched with features and
output classes; (3) data processing aimed at analytical assessment and feedback
for intended users.

2.1     Dataset Collection and Analysis
The collected dataset represents a partial video log of real-life right knee rehabili-
tation programme, capturing a range of exercises with occasional incorrect move-
ments that are known as common errors (Fig. 1).
Nature of injury. The right knee was diagnosed with an injury resulting in in-
flammation and knee instability, without major damage requiring surgery.
Common errors and properties of prescribed knee exercises. The incorrect
rehabilitating exercise movements are subject to qualitative assessment criteria of
an expert and varying during the progression within the prescribed programme.

                        (a)                      (b)




                                         ✓                        ✗
Fig. 1. Selected video frames showing correct posture and common errors from a physio-
therapy session. Qualitative assessment criteria for (a) correct and (b) incorrect movements
are based on evaluation parameters such as injured knee flexion (the knee is positioned in
front of the foot index) and lateral instability i.e. tendency for the knee to collapse inwards.

Data collection protocol. All videos were recorded in full HD 1080p at 30 fps,
using an iPhone (SE, iOS v.15.8.3). The camera was positioned approx. at waist
level. The patient’s right leg was either perpendicular to the camera (to estimate
the knee angles in sagittal plane) or in frontal view to capture lateral knee instabil-
ity. The collected video dataset (Table 1) contains different types of exercises (i.e.
output classes or output labels) combining squat technique with both legs (S),
single leg (SL), and Bulgarian split squat (BSS) as depicted in Fig. 1. To assist (A)
balance and safety, some exercises were performed while holding a chair or a
stick. To evaluate robustness of data processing and exercise counting functionali-
ty, most videos (Table 1) contain multiple exercises, including redundant elements
such as waking into the scene, leg shaking off and knee lifting, which could be
trimmed in future applications.
4

                Table 1. Video dataset with summary of knee exercises.

      File name          Camera view Exercises (output labels)                  Total
      IMG_1142.mp4       Sagittal    5S                                             5
      IMG_1143.mp4       Sagittal    1 S H, 6 SLA, 5 SL                           12
      IMG_1145.mp4       Sagittal       1 SA, 5 SLA, 1 S, 4 SL                    11
      IMG_1147.mp4       Sagittal       4 SA, 5 SLA, 5 SL                         14
      IMG_1150.mp4       Sagittal       5 S, 5 SLA, 5 SL, 1 SA, 7 SL, 8 S         31
      IMG_2407.mp4       Sagittal       10 S, 2 S                                 12
      IMG_2408.mp4       Frontal        7 S, 8 S, 8 S, 4 S                        27
                                        5 SA, 1 BSSA, 9 BSSA, 2 SA,
      IMG_2409.mp4       Sagittal                                                 35
                                        3 SA, 8 BSS, 2 BSS, 5 BSS
      IMG_2410_5.mp4     Frontal        10 S, 12 S, 10 S                          32
                                                             Total exercises:    179

Rehabilitation Process and Movement Goals. During the rehabilitation, the
exercises evolved from simple and personalised to more general and challenging
movements aimed to returning-to-sport demands.
   From a sport science phasing analysis perspective [4], a common property of
the movement for all prescribed right knee rehabilitation exercises is a spatiotem-
poral pattern starting with knee flexion and transitioning to knee extension.
   From an AI perspective and preliminary scope of this work, it was decided that
all exercise categories are to be merged into a single output class. Analytical as-
sessment was provided as batch-processed feedback after exercising sessions. To
promote adherence to home exercising programmes, the generated feedback
should also include a quantitative summary of exercises performed. Considering
potential barriers to digital inclusion (including access to the latest technology),
video processing stages could be completed at the end-user side or performed on a
near-future healthcare analytical platform. Options for privacy-preserving data
exchange with near-future healthcare analytical platform are: MP4 video files,
which could be filtered to preserve diagnostic information and/or CSV timeseries
data.

2.2    Video Data Processing, Visualisation and Analysis
For prototyping purposes, there were three video data processing stages (Fig. 2):
1. Video recording, post-data collection, transfer and conversion. In view of
   broader end-user population, collected videos were transferred from iPhone SE
   (2016) into a MacBook Pro (2015) and PC computer (2012). All collected
   MOV video files were batch-converted into MP4 format using open-source
   ffmpeg command line utility (www.ffmpeg.org) as part of Linux bash shell
   script, achieving approx. compression ratio 1:5 or higher.
                                                                                      5

2. Augmented video feedback, feature extraction and privacy-preserving
   numeric data generation. For augmented replay, generated stick-figure ele-
   ments of human pose estimation overlayed video with side-to-side live-plot.
3. Providing exercise summary. Generated CSV data table were pre-processed
   to filter rows containing NaN values. Knee angles were scaled and normalised
   for automated indexing, visualisation and exercise counting algorithm.




Fig. 2. Three-stage media processing: Video recording, augmented video replay, and exer-
cise summary and indexing.

2.3    Algorithm Development and Visualisation
Augmented Video Feedback and Feature Extraction. Intended as a proof-of-
concept and to enable further incremental development, we employed Google’s
MediaPipe for human pose estimation. From estimated 3D body landmarks, Fea-
ture Selection (FS) included hip, knee, ankle and foot index (tip of the shoe).
  The key processing steps for augmented video replay include:
  1. Frame-by-Frame Analysis: Each video frame is processed to detect body
      landmarks. If landmarks are detected, their coordinates are extracted.
  2. Angle Calculation: The knee angles are computed using the coordinates of
      the hips, knees, and ankles. The script calculates the angle between the thigh
      and calf segments for both the left and right knees.
  3. Safety Alerting Data Generation: In addition to generated timeseries data
      containing human pose estimation, and angle calculation, as part of Feature
      Extraction Technique (FET), we generated binary data indicating possible
      exercising errors.
Front View and Side View Calculations. The methodology presented
distinguishes between frontal and side (sagittal) view calculations.
Frontal view calculation insights:
• For front view analysis (Fig. 3a), the algorithm incorporates the z-coordinates
     of the hips, knees, and ankles to calculate the angles in a 3D space. The hips
1.4.1     Front View Calculation
   • For front view analysis, the depth (z-coordinate) plays a crucial role in
     accurately determining the knee angles.
   • The script incorporates the z-coordinates of the hips, knees, and ankles to
     calculate the angles in a 3D space.
   • This approach ensures that the angles reflect the actual flexion and ex-
     tension of the knees, even when the subject’s legs move closer or further
   6 from the camera.
   • The angle ✓ between the thigh and calf can be computed using the cosine
        (Fig. 3a), are denoted by A1 (left hip) and A2 (right hip), the knees by B1
     rule in a right triangle:
        (left) and B2 (right), and the ankles
                                          ˆ by C1 (left)˙and C2 (right). This approach
        ensures that the angles reflect   the  actual flexion
                                             Adjacent   side and extension of the knees,
                                ✓ “ cos´1
        even when the subject’s legs moveHypotenuse
                                               closer or further from the camera.
   • The angle θ º ∡ABC between the thigh and calf can be computed using the
     or cosine
        using Cosine
                rule (1)Theorem:
                         in a right-angled triangle:
                                          ˆ                        ˙
                                             BC 2 ` AB 2 ´ AC 2
                        ?ABC “ cos´1                                                (1)
                                                  2BC ¨ AB
        because the cosine inverse
                            (a)    function will return
                                                   (b) always a value between 0
        and 180 degrees.


                                                2




   Fig. 3. Trigonometric conceptualisation of: (a) Frontal view of both knees and (b) Sagittal
   view of the right knee, where A0 is the initial hip position, B the knee, and C0 the ankle,
   while A1 and C1 are possible successive video frame estimations.

   Sagittal view calculation insights:
   • a 2DTheplane
                algorithm    calculates
                      assumption,     wherethe the
                                                angle   between
                                                    depth          the thigh is
                                                             (z-coordinate)   and   calf
                                                                                 less     segments using
                                                                                       influential.
         a 2D plane assumption (Fig. 3b). To compute the knee angles, the algorithm
    • The2Dangles
       a calculates   are
                        theadjusted
               plane assumption,        based
                               angle where       on depth
                                               the
                                         between     the
                                                      the relative  positions
                                                            (z-coordinate)
                                                            thigh    and calfis of the
                                                                                less     hips and
                                                                                      influential.
                                                                                  segments      using the
      ankles to account for any misalignment or oblique angles.
         approximate       body   landmarks     coordinates     of the hips,
    • The angles are adjusted based on the relative positions of the hips and knees,   and  ankles.
   •• TheTheangle
       ankles   angles
                     ?Aare
                         1 BC
                 to account   adjusted
                                1 between
                               for        based
                                              theon
                                   any misalignment   the or
                                                   thigh   relative
                                                           and   calfpositions
                                                              oblique can        of the hipsusing
                                                                           be computed
                                                                       angles.                  and ankles
      thetocosine
              accountrule for
                           in aany
                                 rightmisalignment
                                        triangle:        or oblique angles. The angle ∡A1BC1
    • Thebetween      ?Athigh
              angle the   1 BC1 andbetween    the thigh
                                       calf (Fig.   3b) canandbecalf ˆcan1 be˙using
                                                                  computed     computed     using˙rule (2)
                                                                                      theˆcosine
       the  cosine   rule  in a  right  triangle:                ´1    A1 B           ´1    C11 B
      ?A in1 BC
             a right-angled
                  1 “ ⇡ ´?A1    triangle
                                 BA0 ´?C   or by
                                              1 BCapplying
                                                    0 “ ⇡ ´costhe Law of Cosines
                                                                               ´cos (3):
                                                                ˆ A10 B˙           ˆ C1 0 B˙
                                                             ´1   A1 B         ´1    C1 B
        ?A  1 BC
       or using    “ ⇡ ´?A   1 BA
                 1Cosine Theorem: 0 ´?C  1 BC 0 “   ⇡ ´cos                ´cos                  (2)
                                                                  A0 B               C0 B
                                            ˆ                              ˙
        or using Cosine?ATheorem:       ´1    C1 B 2 ` A1 B 2 ´ A1 C12
                           1 BC1 “ cos                                                          (3)
                                            ˆ         2C1 B ¨ A1 B        ˙
                                              C   B 2
                                                       ` A   B 2
                                                                 ´ A  C 2
                       ?A1 BC1 “ cos´1
                                                1          1         1 1
    When we Planes
    Viewing    want to and
                        analyze  the correctness
                               Safety  Alerting. of  2Cthe
                                                     To  1B  ¨ A1 B common
                                                             movement
                                                          highlight       of the knees  from
                                                                                  errors,  on video
a front  view and
    overlay    perspective,  we can
                    side-to-side      have the plot
                                   timeseries    following
                                                        (Fig.sample
                                                                2), wesituation:
                                                                         integrated customisable
     When we want to analyze the correctness of the movement of the knees from
    criteria for both front view and side view perspectives:
 a front view perspective, we can have the following sample situation:
   Sagittal View Safety Alerting Rule Description. The exercise is considered
   incorrect if the knee is positioned in front of the foot index.
                                                                                      7

Frontal View Safety Alerting Rule Description. The exercise is considered
incorrect if the knee is positioned inwards relative to the foot, as determined using
the collinearity condition ∆(A,B,C).
Augmented video replay and CSV data stream generation. The algorithm, depicted as a
flowchart (Fig. 4) combines Computer Vision (CV) approaches such as Google MediaPipe
for pose estimation and Feature Extraction Technique (FET) for augmented video replay
and numeric timeseries data logging in CSV text files. Feature Extraction Technique
(FET) included knee angle estimation and safety alerting binary data that may
require expert’s attention.




Fig. 4. Video processing flowchart of augmented video feedback.

Exercise Summary: Counting and Indexing Visualisation Algorithm. As the
third stage of numeric data processing,
Algorithm 1 represents traditional computing approach, which the same as artifi-
cial neural networks (ANNs) would still require extracted features and initial knee
exercise labelling information for its parameter tunning and validation. However,
the algorithm did not require a larger labelled dataset for modelling numeric data
timeseries.

       Algorithm 1. Counting, indexing and visualising exercise variation patterns.
    Input:  CSV_file, # Extracted pose estimation data and knee angles
            Sel_col   # List of selected columns, including right knee
    Output: Knee_ex_cnt,                              # Exercise count
8

      Preconditions: CSV_file, Sel_col            # Input data must exist
      Default parameters (constants):
      STD_TRESHOLD = 0.5                       # FP vs. FN ratio tunning
      EXRC_FREQ    = 4 # Min. exercise time, filtering random movements
      1:   T_knee_flex = read (CSV_file[Sel_col])
      2:   T_knee_flex = preprocess(T_knee_flex)             # NaN removal
           ## 0-crossing and standard deviation timeseries analysis     ##
      3:   Avg_knee_flex = mean(T_knee_flex[RightKneeAngle])
      4:   for i = 1 to T_knee_flex[last] do
             T_knee_flex[i] = T_knee_flex [i] - Avg_knee_flex
           end do
      5:   peakTreshold = standard_deviation(T_knee_flex) * STD_TRESHOLD
      6:   [Knee_pks, Knee_locs] = findNegativePeaks(T_knee_flex, …
                  MinPeakHeight=peakTreshold, MinPeakDistance=EXRC_FREQ)
      7:   Knee_ex_cnt = length(Knee_pks)      # = size of Knee_pks array
      8:   drawVisualisation(T_knee_flex, markers=[Knee_pks, Knee_locs])
      9:   output (Knee_ex_cnt)


2.4       Results Analysis

Visual results (Fig. 5) achieved on rehabilitation case study dataset (Table 1),
show color-coding of video overlays and side-to-side generated timeseries of knee
angle stored as CSV numeric data.
    (a)                                          (b)




    (c)                                          (d)




Fig. 5. Visual feedback results: (a) Correct posture (sagittal view), (b) potentially excessive
knee angle where knee is positioned in front of the foot index, (c) correct posture (frontal
view), and (d) incorrect posture, where the knees are collapsing inwards.


Safety alerting data (highlighted in red for the injured knee on Fig. 5c and Fig. 5d)
is to draw expert or patient’s attention to possible common errors. Exercise
counting results achieved on rehabilitation case study dataset (Table 1), were
tested on extracted CSV timeseries numeric data from individual video files.
                                                                                           9

(a)                                                   (b)




Fig. 6. Exercise counting and indexing results: (a) Per individual file and (b) overall.

Regarding robustness and adaptiveness, the default parameters remained the same
for all processed video files (Fig. 6), including noisy data, random movements
(e.g. shaking legs, lifting knees, and other loosening up movements) and mixed
exercises repetitions.


3       Discussion

Generated post session safety-alerting data that may require the attention of a
physiotherapy expert are recorded, however we did not yet implement real-time
safety alerting functionality and mobile video streaming.
   The benefit of storing redundant data on 3D pose estimation with addi-
tional features. CSV-formatted text files for post-exercise analysis, allow rapid
prototyping and code base reusability and processing platform independence.
   Big-data Analytical Healthcare Platforms Considerations. Aligned with the
authors’ views: (1) The experimental artefacts presented, transparent AI and algo-
rithms are important for both end-users and healthcare cloud infrastructures; (2)
national healthcare analytical platforms and infrastructure should operate within
national systems and not rely on third-party cloud infrastructures based overseas,
and; (3) the end-users should be in control of their privacy and choose what data
they are willing to process and share.


4       Conclusion

In this research, we used real-life knee rehabilitation videos achieving a proof-of-
concept of augmentation of video replay with extracted diagnostic information.
The presented algorithms can be deployed on local near-obsolete computers or on
near-future healthcare analytical platforms. Augmented video replay can show
configurable overlay elements of stick figure, with generated side-to-side
timeseries plot showing colour-coded safe and unsafe knee exercise positions. For
local and cloud-based healthcare platform processing, privacy-preserving extract-
ed numerical data (in CSV text format), contains human body pose estimation
10

from video frames, and extracted exercise movement features to preserve diagnos-
tic information. Adaptive exercise indexing algorithm can correctly identify
(91.67%–100%) of all exercises from side- and front-view rehabilitation videos.
For adherence to rehabilitation programme, counting and exercise indexing data
for video log summary can also be used for additional diagnostic data expressed
over time to inform decisions on personalised rehabilitation programme. Trans-
parent algorithm design for adaptive visual analysis of various knee exercise pat-
terns contributes towards interpretable AI objectives with logically acceptable and
actionable feedback. For local/home-based and cloud/on-premises infrastructures,
indexed data can: (1) Facilitate direct access to the movement or exercise of inter-
est; (2) Be used to automatically trim or extract video sequence from the footage
using open-source command-line utility such as ffmpeg.
   Future work will be focused on: (1) Interpretable AI and near-future healthcare
platforms based on horizontally scalable hardware and open-source software of-
fering flexible privacy-preserving rehabilitation video and data logging; (2) aug-
mented rehabilitation to be developed in real-time video streaming with safety
alerting and enhanced video replays for local and cloud analytical platforms.

Acknowledgement – We wish to thank Auckland University of Technology
(AUT) for providing access to the recording facilities and equipment. The first
author wishes to thank Physiotherapy expert Suzanne McKenzie for her profes-
sional service, additional explanations, engaging practice and patience.

Dataset Declaration – The self-reported video dataset from the first author fol-
lows Auckland University of Technology Ethics Committee (AUTEC) guidelines
(https://www.aut.ac.nz/research/researchethics/guidelines-and-procedures#6, ac-
cessed 21 November 2024) and it is aligned with exception section 6.4. “Research
and teaching in which a single investigator is the subject of his/her own research
and where no physically or psychologically hazardous procedure is involved.”


References

 1. Gannon, D. (2023). Physiotherapy services in New Zealand - Market research report
    (2013-2028). https://www.ibisworld.com/nz/industry/physiotherapy-services/619/. Ac-
    cessed 15 Nov. 2024.
 2. Physiopedia (2020). Telerehabilitation and smartphone apps in physiotherapy. Ac-
    cessed 20 Nov. 2024.
 3. Physiopedia (2024). Adherence to home exercise programs. Accessed 20 Nov. 2024.
 4. Knudson, D. V., & Morrison, C. S. (2002). Qualitative analysis of human movement
    (2nd ed.). Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics.
