[2508.07617] On the Limits of Selective AI Prediction:A Case Study in Clinical Decision Making On the Limits of Selective AI Prediction: A Case Study in Clinical Decision Making Sarah Jabbour David Fouhey Nikola Banovic Stephanie D. Shepard Ella Kazerooni Michael W. Sjoding Jenna Wiens Abstract AI has the potential to augment human decision making. However, even high-performing models can produce inaccurate predictions when deployed. These inaccuracies, combined with automation bias, where humans overrely on AI predictions, can result in worse decisions. Selective prediction, in which potentially unreliable model predictions are hidden from users, has been proposed as a solution. This approach assumes that when AI abstains and informs the user so, humans make decisions as they would without AI involvement. To test this assumption, we study the effects of selective prediction on human decisions in a clinical context. We conducted a user study of 259 clinicians tasked with diagnosing and treating hospitalized patients. We compared their baseline performance without any AI involvement to their AI-assisted accuracy with and without selective prediction. Our findings indicate that selective prediction mitigates the negative effects of inaccurate AI in terms of decision accuracy. Compared to no AI assistance, clinician accuracy declined when shown inaccurate AI predictions (66% [95% CI: 56%-75%] vs. 56% [95% CI: 46%-66%]), but recovered under selective prediction (64% [95% CI: 54%-73%]). However, while selective prediction nearly maintains overall accuracy, our results suggest that it alters patterns of mistakes: when informed the AI abstains, clinicians underdiagnose (18% increase in missed diagnoses) and undertreat (35% increase in missed treatments) compared to no AI input at all. Our findings underscore the importance of empirically validating assumptions about how humans engage with AI within human–AI systems. Preregistration — https://osf.io/m7avk Introduction AI models have been developed to assist human decision making in a variety of domains, such as child welfare ( De-Arteaga, Fogliato, and Chouldechova 2020 ) , wildlife conservation ( Beery, Morris, and Yang 2019 ) , and healthcare ( Nori et al. 2023 ; Gulshan et al. 2016 ; Adams et al. 2022 ; McKinney et al. 2020 ) . Yet, as AI-assisted decision-making becomes more prevalent, the risk of harm from incorrect AI predictions also grows. For example, automation bias, in which humans overrely on incorrect AI predictions, can propagate model errors through the human decision-maker. This is especially worrisome in high-stakes settings, such as healthcare, where it can result in downstream harm such as incorrect diagnoses ( Jabbour et al. 2023 ; Gaube et al. 2021 ) . Thus, researchers have focused on reducing overreliance and achieving appropriate reliance on AI: ensuring that decision-makers rely on AI when its predictions are correct, and ignore AI predictions otherwise ( Schemmer et al. 2023 ) . Figure 1: Left: In the multilabel setting, AI predicts several outcomes per patient, some of which are unreliable and may harm decisions (left). Right: Standard AI-assisted decision making shows all predictions, but risks automation bias. Instead, selective prediction shows only reliable AI predictions while hiding unreliable ones. To support appropriate reliance, researchers have explored interventions that nudge human decision-makers to make their own decisions when AI may be wrong. One common approach is selective prediction ( El-Yaniv and Wiener 2010 ) , where an AI may withhold its prediction on cases where it could harm the human’s decision. For example, in contrast to the standard workflow, in which the AI provides input for every decision (Figure 1 ‘Standard AI Workflow’), in selective prediction, some mechanism identifies predictions that are “unreliable” and will likely to lead to worse decisions (e.g., due to inaccuracy or uncertainty). In such cases, the system abstains from showing the prediction and asks the human to make a decision on their own (Figure 1 ‘AI + Selective Prediction’). When estimating human-AI team performance under selective prediction, it is often assumed that humans will respond exactly as they would without any AI involvement ( Nam et al. 2022 ; Farzaneh et al. 2023 ; Wang et al. 2023 ) . However, a key distinction exists between settings where the AI does not exist and those where the human is told the AI model has hidden its output . It is unclear if informing the human that the AI withheld its prediction alters human decision-making. Thus, in this work we empirically study the effects of selective prediction on human decisions in a real-world multilabel setting, using clinical diagnosis and treatment as a case study. This paper addresses the specific research question: Does selective prediction improve AI-assisted human decision making? To answer this, we conducted a study of 259 clinicians tasked with diagnosing the causes of hospitalized patients’ acute respiratory failure (shortness of breath). Acute respiratory failure (ARF) is a common condition that is often misdiagnosed and could benefit from AI-augmented clinical decision making ( Kempker et al. 2020 ; Zwaan et al. 2012 ; Jabbour et al. 2022 ) . Patients could have multiple concurrent causes, providing a useful test bed for multilabel selective prediction, where an AI model hides its prediction for a subset of conditions. We recruited clinicians who commonly care for these patients and randomized them to receive AI predictions with and without selective prediction. Contributions: This study is the first to empirically test selective AI prediction in the real-world context of clinical diagnostic and treatment decisions. We have two main findings. First, selective prediction mitigates the effects of inaccurate AI on human decisions regarding overall diagnostic and treatment accuracy. Second, selective prediction changes how clinicians navigate the tradeoff between false positives and false negatives: When AI abstains (and informs clinicians so), false positives decrease for patients who don’t need treatment, but false negatives increase for those who do . These findings underscore the need to empirically test AI deployment strategies and highlight that deployment decisions related to selective AI prediction must consider tradeoffs between the types of errors users are willing to accept. Background and Related Work Our work lies at the intersection of automation bias, selective prediction, and human-AI teaming. Mitigating Automation Bias. Prior work on mitigating automation bias has focused on designing AI interventions to help end users discern when to rely on the AI advice. In the field of explainable AI (XAI), explanations have been proposed to communicate the reasoning behind AI advice, to enable end users to ignore the AI when it is wrong and rely on it when it is right. However, the effectiveness of explanations has been mixed ( Lai and Tan 2019 ; Lai, Liu, and Tan 2020 ; Zhang, Liao, and Bellamy 2020 ; Jabbour et al. 2023 ; Bansal et al. 2021 ; Sivaraman et al. 2023 ) and can even mislead users into trusting flawed AI ( Lakkaraju and Bastani 2020 ) . Cognitive forcing functions–interventions that “slow down” thinking to make users focus during decision making ( Lambe et al. 2016 ) –have also been proposed to encourage users to engage more with the AI tools ( Buçinca, Malaya, and Gajos 2021 ; Gajos and Mamykina 2022 ) , although they may require a certain level of task expertise to reduce automation bias ( Banovic et al. 2023 ) . Researchers have also studied communicating uncertainty information about the AI prediction ( Kim et al. 2024 ; Dong and Hayes 2012 ; Gkatzia, Lemon, and Rieser 2016 ; Prabhudesai et al. 2023 ) , helping users identify when the AI might be unreliable and subsequently make better decisions. These approaches, however, assume the ‘Standard AI Workflow’ where AI predictions are always shown to end users. Our work studies the impact of the complementary strategy of selective prediction, where the AI selectively hides outputs believed to be potentially harmful to decision making. Figure 2: Example of how a patient case for an individual hospitalized with ARF was shown to participants. It includes all information needed to make a diagnosis. Note: this is a fake case to preserve patient privacy. Human-AI Teaming. Several approaches have been considered to optimize human-AI team performance. Selective prediction refers to classifiers with a reject option, where they choose not to provide an AI prediction for reasons such as high uncertainty ( Chow 1970 ) . This concept is also referred to as AI deferral ( Mozannar et al. 2023 ) , where the AI abstains from making a decision, instead asking the human to make a decision on their own ( El-Yaniv and Wiener 2010 ) . This potentially limits overreliance since the unreliable prediction is hidden from the human. Several algorithms have been developed to learn to defer to the human ( Lykouris and Weng 2024 ; Mozannar et al. 2023 ; Li and Passonneau 2024 ; Shah et al. 2022 ; Chen et al. 2023 ; Nam et al. 2022 ; Strong, Men, and Noble 2025 ) , with the assumption that a good selective prediction mechanism should result in improved human-AI team performance. While it remains unclear which algorithmic approach yields the best selective prediction mechanism, addressing this question is beyond the scope of our work. Instead, we focus on isolating the effect of selective prediction, specifically in a multilabel setting. Here, a human is always responsible for making the final decision. For a given input, the AI model generates a set of predictions and reveals only a subset. While common in real-world scenarios, multilabel tasks have not been empirically studied in the context of selective prediction. In contrast to the binary setting, where the human either sees all the AI input or none at all, the multilabel setting presents a unique challenge: humans receive partial information, as the AI displays only a subset of predictions while hiding others. It remains unclear how this partial information influences human decisions. Estimating Human-AI Team Performance in Simulation. Several studies have supported using selective prediction to improve human-AI teams by simulating its effects ( Farzaneh et al. 2023 ; Wang et al. 2023 ) . These studies estimate human–AI team performance using retrospective data. They first collect independent decisions from both humans and AI on all cases, and then simulate different human-AI teaming strategies to calculate AI-assisted performance. However, this approach assumes that when the AI notifies the user that it abstains from making a prediction, the human will respond exactly as they would without AI input. We test this assumption by empirically measuring the impact of selective prediction on human decisions. Figure 3: Left: How AI model scores were presented to participants (a) without selective prediction and (b) with selective prediction. Right: participants were asked to diagnose and treat the patient. They are also asked to rate their perceived difficulty of the case. Empirically Testing Selective Prediction. Bondi et al. empirically studied the effects of selective prediction in a conservation context ( Bondi et al. 2022 ) . In their study, participants determined the presence of animals in camera trap images, showing that AI deferral can mitigate the impact of inaccurate AI. However, they examined a binary task where AI input was either fully revealed or completely withheld. In contrast, we test the influence of AI on expert users (clinicians) in a multilabel clinical task where the AI selectively reveals only a subset of its predictions for each patient. Preliminaries Here, we formalize selective prediction in the multilabel setting. Let D D = { x i , y i } i = 1 n \{x_{i},y_{i}\}_{i=1}^{n} be a dataset of n n test samples, where x i x_{i} is the input (e.g., patient features) and y i ∈ { 0 , 1 } m y_{i}\in\{0,1\}^{m} is a vector of m m binary labels (e.g., diagnoses). For each sample x i x_{i} , a model makes m m independent predictions, one for each label y ^ i , j ∈ [ 0 , 1 ] \hat{y}_{i,j}\in[0,1] for j = 1 , … , m j=1,...,m (Figure 1). We assume the model has a selective prediction mechanism that decides whether to show a model prediction y ^ i , j \hat{y}_{i,j} to a user. This mechanism computes a reliability score u i , j = a ⁡ ( x i , y ^ i , j ) u_{i,j}=a(x_{i},\hat{y}_{i,j}) , where u i , j ∈ [ 0 , 1 ] u_{i,j}\in[0,1] reflects the reliability of the j j th prediction for sample i i . Unreliable predictions are hidden. For example, in multilabel diagnosis, the model predicts multiple conditions, but reveals only a subset. We only consider model predictions that, if shown to users, could harm human decision making. Thus, while the reasons for selective prediction (e.g., uncertainty, historical inaccuracy on similar inputs) could vary, they are not our primary concern. Instead, the key requirement is that u u correlates with a prediction’s likelihood of harming human decisions. In our experiments, we assume that the selective prediction mechanism generates reliability scores u i , j u_{i,j} for each sample. With probability p p (set to 0.11 0.11 in our experiments), the mechanism generates an incorrect score, hiding a prediction that would not necessarily hurt decision making. This allows us control the accuracy of the selective prediction mechanism, and instead focus our investigation on human responses to it. Experimental Setup We conducted a pre-registered study 1 1 1 Link available upon publication. in which we recruited 259 clinicians to test the effects of selective prediction on diagnostic and treatment decisions. This study was approved by our Institutional Review Board. Diagnosing and Treating Acute Respiratory Failure. We focused on the diagnosis and treatment of acute respiratory failure (ARF), a commonly encountered condition in practice ( Kempker et al. 2020 ) that is often misdiagnosed ( Zwaan et al. 2012 ) and could benefit from AI-augmented decision making. ARF has three common causes: pneumonia, heart failure, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). A patient can have any combination of these diagnoses, including all three or none at all. This makes ARF an ideal test-bed for multilabel selective prediction, where a model makes independent predictions for each diagnosis and can defer to the clinician for a subset of the conditions. Study Task. Clinicians were presented with patient cases containing key clinical details: patient presentation, past medical history, current medications, physical exam findings, laboratory findings, and chest X-ray (Figure 2 ). Data in each case were modified slightly to protect patient privacy without compromising information needed to make a diagnosis (see Appendix B ). After each case, clinicians were asked to assess how likely pneumonia, heart failure, and COPD were each independently contributing to the patient’s ARF on a scale from 0 to 100 (the patient can have multiple diagnoses at once) (Figure 3 ). Scores were recalibrated based on disease prevalence so that a threshold of 50 consistently indicated a positive diagnosis across all three outcomes (see Appendix C ). This was communicated through the colorbar and text ‘unlikely’ and ‘likely’ at the far ends. After making a diagnosis, clinicians selected what (if any) treatments they would administer (antibiotics, intravenous diuretics, steroids) and reported the perceived difficulty of each patient case on a four-point Likert scale from “Not at all difficult” to “Very difficult” (Figure 3 ). Dataset. We used 45 cases of patients hospitalized with ARF at a large academic medical center (see Appendix B ). Ground truth diagnoses were based on retrospective chart review by multiple physicians. The appropriate treatment for each patient was the standard treatment for each condition: antibiotics for pneumonia, intravenous diuretics for heart failure, and steroids for COPD. AI Model Predictions. When participants received AI input, we presented AI predictions directly after each patient case and before the participant made a diagnostic and treatment decision (Figure 3 ). We follow the setup of ( Jabbour et al. 2022 ) , where the AI model was trained to predict the likelihood that each patient had pneumonia, heart failure, and COPD using their chest X-ray, laboratory results, vital signs, and demographics. It made 135 predictions across the 45 patients and three conditions (pneumonia, heart failure, and COPD), assigning a 0-100 score for each diagnosis (see Appendix C ). Overall, the model achieved an accuracy of 75%, which outperforms always predicting the majority class (68%). However, like any AI model, it sometimes makes errors. Implementing Selective Prediction. Instead of implementing a selective prediction algorithm, we assumed access to an existing mechanism. Specifically, the mechanism deferred in conditions where the model was highly inaccurate (i.e., where showing the prediction would likely harm clinical decisions) but did not defer in highly accurate conditions (i.e., those conditions where showing the prediction was likely to help). The mechanism identifies most, but not all, harmful cases: it sometimes defers even when the model prediction is correct. Using an oracle separates the mechanism’s accuracy from its effect. We hand-selected these conditions as follows: • Inaccurate Subset: Model gets it (mostly) wrong . Of the 135 predictions, we identified 28 predictions (14 pneumonia, 8 heart failure, and 6 COPD) where the model achieved an average accuracy of 10%. These predictions corresponded to 23 patient cases (for some patients, the model was inaccurate for multiple conditions). For these conditions, the model could abstain from providing the prediction under selective prediction, if the participant was randomized to such behavior. • Accurate Subset: Model gets it (mostly) right . The model gets 107 of 135 predictions mostly right, with an average accuracy of 91%. These model predictions are always shown to participants, no matter the randomization. Forty-one of the predictions came from the same 23 patients as the inaccurate subset (totaling 69 predictions for this set of 23 patients), while 66 predictions came from the other 22 patients. While we could have used only patient cases where the AI defers on at least one condition, we recognize this would be unrealistic. In practice, clinicians are more likely to encounter a mix of cases: some where the AI defers on a subset of conditions (cases with both inaccurate and accurate predictions) and others where it defers on none (cases with only accurate predictions). Thus, we included both types of cases in the survey. Survey Design &amp; Randomization We designed the survey to evaluate the impact of selective AI on clinical decisions. Each clinician was assigned nine patient cases sampled from 45 cases (Figure 4 ) (see Appendix D ). The survey presented the nine cases as follows: • Cases 1-3: No AI input ( Clinician Alone ). The first three cases, randomly chosen from all 45 cases, were presented without AI input. These cases allowed us to measure the clinicians’ baseline diagnostic and treatment accuracy without AI input. • Cases 4-9: AI Input . The next six cases included AI input, each with three AI predictions generated for each condition. In a realistic setting, AI models will not always defer to clinicians. Thus, three patient cases were chosen from the set of 23 patients containing inaccurate and accurate predictions. The other three cases were chosen from the set of 22 patients with only accurate predictions. We maintained a 50/50 ratio of patient cases with and without inaccurate predictions to ensure sufficient power to test our hypotheses. The order of cases with and without selective prediction was randomized to avoid ordering effects. Participants were randomized into two groups: seeing all AI predictions or seeing AI with selective prediction. Thus, while participants saw both inaccurate and accurate predictions, whether or not selective prediction was applied depended on the randomization: 1. AI without selective prediction ( Clinician + AI ): In this randomization, predictions for all conditions were shown, regardless of their accuracy (Figure 3 a). This allowed us to evaluate the impact of inaccurate predictions on clinical decisions. We hypothesized that clinician accuracy would decrease when seeing inaccurate predictions due to overreliance on inaccurate AI. 2. AI with selective prediction ( Clinician + Selective Prediction ): In this randomization, the AI model abstained from showing inaccurate predictions, instead presenting the message “the model defers to you” (Figure 3 b). All accurate predictions were displayed. This allowed us to evaluate the effect of selective prediction that hides inaccurate predictions. We hypothesized that clinician accuracy would not decrease compared to their baseline without any AI input, as the inaccurate predictions were hidden from them. AI Introduction &amp; Knowledge Check. After the three Clinician Alone cases, participants were introduced to the AI model (Figure 4 ). They were told they would see a clinical decision support tool designed to determine the causes of ARF. To avoid bias, they first saw how the tool would look if the task were to identify objects in consumer photographs (Appendix Figure 9 ). To ensure participants understood selective prediction, those in Clinician + Selective Prediction had to confirm their understanding of selective prediction before proceeding (Appendix Figure 8 ). Study Procedure. The study was deployed on Qualtrics, a web-based survey platform. We recruited clinicians from hospitals across nine US states (see Appendix A ). Participants were physicians who manage hospitalized patients with ARF and are potential end users of this AI tool. Evaluation Measures. We aimed to understand the impact of selective prediction in the inaccurate subset in our analyses. Thus, while the accurate subset were included in the survey to reflect real-world clinical care, they were not the primary focus of our analysis. Therefore, we consider only responses to the inaccurate subset: clinician responses to conditions without AI input ( Clinician Alone ), clinician response to conditions with inaccurate AI input ( Clinician + AI ), and clinician responses to conditions when told the AI defers ( Clinician + Selective Prediction ). Since patients could have one, multiple, or none of the conditions, we treated each response for pneumonia, heart failure, and COPD as separate data points for calculating performance. We assessed the impact of selective prediction via both objective and subjective measures: Figure 4: Survey Flow. Clinicians saw three patients without AI input, then were randomized to AI with or without selective prediction. Both groups were given an introduction to the AI model, and those with selective prediction completed a knowledge check to confirm their understanding. Three cases had a mix of conditions from the inaccurate (I) and accurate (A) subsets, and three cases had conditions only from the accurate (A) subset, randomly ordered to prevent ordering effects. • Average diagnostic accuracy : We calculated the average diagnostic accuracy across all participants and conditions. For each individual response, we compared the clinicians’ diagnostic assessment to the ground truth diagnostic label. The diagnosis was considered correct if it agreed with the ground truth label. Responses of 50 or higher were considered positive for the diagnosis. • Average treatment accuracy : After making a diagnostic decision, clinicians must make a treatment decision that directly affects patient outcomes. Thus, we also calculated the average treatment accuracy across all participants and conditions. Each selected treatment was compared to the the ground truth diagnosis. A treatment decision was considered correct if it corresponded to the ground truth diagnosis, specifically: antibiotics for pneumonia, intravenous diuretics for heart failure, and steroids for COPD. In this calculation, a decision to treat was positive, while a decision not to treat was negative. • Average false positive and false negative rates : To understand how errors were distributed across each setting, we calculated both the false positive and false negative rates for diagnosis and treatment. • Average perceived difficulty : To analyze differences in perception of difficulty of each patient case, we converted the difficulty Likert scale ratings into integers (1-4). We then calculated the average difficulty rating in each setting with standard errors obtained via a nonparametric block bootstrap where the resampling is done at the participant level ( Davison 1997 ) . Exploratory Subgroup Analysis. Beyond overall performance, we examined how clinician type affected their reliance on AI. We conducted the analyses in two groups of participants: (1) Physicians –those with a Doctor of Medicine (MD) or Doctor of Osteopathic Medicine (DO) degree (residents, fellows, or attendings), and (2) Advanced Practice Practitioners (APP)–physician assistants (PA) or nurse practitioners (NP), who undergo a more abbreviated medical training and do not hold an MD or DO. This distinction allowed us to assess how differences in length of medical training influenced the effects of selective prediction. Statistical Analysis. For each outcome (accuracy, false negative rate, false positive rate), we fit a generalized linear mixed model (GLMM) to account for repeated measures at both the participant and patient level ( Clayton 1996 ) . Each outcome was regressed on the case setting ( Clinician Alone , Clinician + AI , Clinician + Selective Prediction ) as a fixed effect and the patient and participant ID as random effects. We fit models for the overall analyses on all responses to the inaccurate subset and report the p-values for each setting with AI input ( Clinician + AI , Clinician + Selective Prediction ) relative to the baseline without AI input ( Clinician Alone ), using a significance level of 0.05. We split responses by clinician type (APP vs. physician) to fit GLMMs for subgroup analyses, but did not test for statistical significance as we were not sufficiently powered to do so. We report marginal means for the fixed effects while averaging over random effects to provide interpretable comparisons. Figure 5: Diagnostic and treatment accuracy on the inaccurate subset across settings with 95% confidence intervals. Statistical significance is reported only for overall analyses. When shown predictions ( Clinician + AI ), diagnostic and treatment accuracy drops significantly compared to baseline ( Clinician Alone ). Clinician + Selective Prediction restores accuracy close to Clinician Alone . Trends held for APPs and physicians. p &lt; &lt; 0.05 0.05 : ∗ * , p &lt; &lt; 0.001 0.001 : ∗ ⁣ ∗ ** . Experiments &amp; Results To understand the impact of selective AI on clinical decisions, we first analyzed the effects of inaccurate AI ( Clinician + AI ) as well as selective prediction ( Clinician + Selective Prediction ) on clinician diagnostic and treatment accuracy. Then, we analyze the error rates of participants in each setting to understand how they are making decisions. Participants. 259 clinicians completed the survey across nine US states (Appendix Table 1 ). 125 were randomized to AI without selective prediction and 134 were randomized to AI with selective prediction. Both groups had a median of 5 years in practice, and 95% reported practicing hospital medicine, indicating that we successfully surveyed those who traditionally take care of patients with ARF. 1. Selective Prediction Mitigates Inaccurate AI Evaluation. We fit two GLMMs on responses to the inaccurate subset to predict diagnostic and treatment accuracy (correct or not). Results. Overall, inaccurate AI harms diagnostic and treatment accuracy, while selective prediction reduces this harm. Inaccurate AI hurts decision accuracy. At baseline ( Clinician Alone ), diagnostic accuracy was 66% (95% CI: [56-75]) (Figure 5 , Appendix Table 2 ), exceeding performance when predicting the most frequent label (53.5%). When shown inaccurate AI predictions ( Clinician + AI ), accuracy dropped 10 percentage points (pp) to 56% (46-66) (p-value &lt; &lt; 0.05). This was observed in both APPs and physicians, but the effect on APPs was stronger (-21 pp) compared to physicians (-6 pp). These trends held for treatment accuracy. Selective prediction mitigates inaccurate AI. Compared to Clinician + AI , diagnostic accuracy improved in Clinician + Selective Prediction when inaccurate predictions were hidden (64% [54-73] vs. 56% [46-66]), and the difference from Clinician Alone was not statistically significant (Figure 5 , Appendix Table 2 ). Again, the effects were stronger for APPs compared to physicians: APP accuracy recovered by 15 pp (66% [49-79] vs. 51% [35-67]), while physician accuracy recovered by 4 pp (63% [53-73] vs. 59% [48-69]). These trends were consistent for treatment accuracy. Figure 6: False positive and false negative rates on the inaccurate subset with 95% confidence intervals. Under Clinician + AI , both false positive and false negative rates increase. With Clinician + Selective Prediction , false positive rates return to baseline levels, while false negative rates stay elevated. p &lt; 0.05 : ∗ &lt;0.05:* , p &lt; 0.001 : ∗ ∗ &lt;0.001:** . 2. Selective Prediction Leads to Underdiagnosis Selective prediction appears promising based on its ability to mitigate the negative effects of inaccurate AI. Here, we illustrate tradeoffs in selective prediction by analyzing the types of errors made when the AI abstains. Specifically, we calculated false positive and negative rates for both diagnostic and treatment accuracy in each setting. Evaluation. We fit GLMMs to predict false positive and negative rates for both diagnosis and treatment decisions. For false positives, we used responses where the condition was absent but the clinician diagnosed the patient as having the condition. For false negatives, we used responses where the condition was present, but the clinician missed it. Results. Selective prediction alters patterns of mistakes: Clinician + Selective Prediction leads to more false negatives compared to Clinician Alone . Inaccurate AI increases false positives. Without AI input ( Clinician Alone ), diagnostic false positive and false negative rates were 27% (14–45) and 39% (30–48), respectively (Figure 6 , Appendix Table 3 ). When shown inaccurate predictions ( Clinician + AI ), false positives increased significantly by 16 pp to 43% (26–62; p-value &lt; &lt; 0.05), while false negatives increased by 5 pp to 44% (35–54), though not significantly. This effect was stronger among APPs (FP +29 pp; FN +16 pp) than physicians (FP +13 pp; FN +2 pp). These trends held for treatment outcomes. Selective prediction reduces false positives, but increases false negatives. Under Clinician + Selective Prediction , the diagnostic false positive rate returned to baseline levels ( Clinician Alone ) (21% [10–37] vs. 27% [14–45]) (Figure 6 , Appendix Table 3 ). However, the false negative rate remained elevated compared to baseline (46% [37–56] vs. 39% [30–48]), though this difference was not statistically significant. These trends held for treatment decisions as well, where false negatives were significantly higher under selective prediction compared to baseline. Effects were consistent across both APPs and physicians. 3. Effects of AI on Perceived Difficulty of Cases We hypothesized that informing clinicians about the AI’s abstention would lead them to believe the AI struggled with the case. Thus, they would perceive it as more challenging and rate the case as more difficult. Evaluation. We compared the average difficulty rating across case settings ( Clinician Alone , Clinician + AI , Clinician + Selective Prediction ). Results. At baseline, average perceived case difficulty was 1.17 (95% CI: [1.13-1.21]). AI without selective prediction ( Clinician + AI ) increased the perceived difficulty of patient cases to 1.20 (1.16-1.25) and with selective prediction ( Clinician + Selective Prediction ) increased this further to 1.27 (1.23-1.32) (Figure 7 , Appendix Table 4 ). Discussion &amp; Conclusion We measured the impact of selective AI on human decisions in the multilabel setting using clinical diagnosis and treatment. Compared to no AI input, clinician accuracy declines when presented inaccurate AI primarily driven by an increase in false positives, but recovers under selective prediction. However, selective prediction changes how clinicians tradeoff between false positives and false negatives: while it reduces false positives (i.e., reduces overdiagnosis and unnecessary treatments) caused by inaccurate AI, false negatives also increased (i.e., clinicians were more likely to miss diagnoses and treatments) when AI abstained. There are several potential reasons for this behavior. First, clinicians may interpret AI deferral as the absence of a diagnosis rather than a neutral statement. To mitigate such potential behavior, we presented those randomized to selective prediction with a knowledge check, requiring them to confirm their understanding that the AI model was not expressing an opinion on the deferred conditions. However, we cannot be certain that participants fully understood selective prediction, and future work could focus on improving understanding. Second, clinicians may be subject to availability bias , the tendency to weigh the likelihood of things by how easily they are recalled ( Gopal et al. 2021 ) . Since the AI only presents a subset of predictions, clinicians might perceive those presented as more likely to be causing the patients’ respiratory failure simply because they come to mind more easily. This contrasts with prior work on deferral in the binary setting ( Bondi et al. 2022 ) , where participants saw either full or no AI information. Third, since cases were perceived as more difficult if the model deferred, selective prediction could be causing clinicians to engage with Type 2 thinking, a slower “reflective” and “analytic” system of thinking (compared to Type 1 thinking, a faster “intuitive” and “heuristic” system of thinking). Research suggests that clinicians make more diagnostic errors when using Type 2 thinking ( Norman et al. 2017 ) . Figure 7: We plot average difficulty rating across settings on cases with with inaccurate predictions. Clinician + AI increases the perceived difficulty, and Clinician + Selective Prediction increases this further. While trends were consistent across participants grouped by length of medical training, those with less medical training (APPs) were more influenced by AI than those with more medical training (physicians). APPs typically work under physician supervision ( Smith 2023 ) . Thus, they may rely more on AI due to lower confidence in their judgments or tendency to agree with external diagnoses. However, physicians are trained to critically question decisions ( Araújo, Gomes, and Ribeiro 2024 ) so they may scrutinize AI outputs more, making them less susceptible to inaccurate AI. They may also be less susceptible to switching to Type 2 thinking when presented with deferral, preventing diagnostic errors ( Nori et al. 2023 ) . These findings highlight the need for AI interventions that promote appropriate reliance across user types, ensuring more healthcare workers benefit from AI. Depending on the deployment setting, understanding the tradeoffs between false positive and false negatives is crucial for deciding whether to implement selective prediction, as different settings may tolerate different errors. For example, in high-risk clinical settings, missed diagnoses can delay critical treatment, whereas false positives may lead to unnecessary treatments. The balance between these errors may help determine if selective prediction is a viable strategy. Our results indicate the importance of empirically validating assumptions about human behavior when estimating human-AI team behavior in AI-assisted decision making. Our study has limitations. First, while we use clinical decision support as a test-bed, our online survey-based approach differs from real clinical environments. In practice, clinicians may feel greater pressure to make accurate diagnostic and treatment decisions, which might influence their reliance on AI. Further investigation in an integrated clinical setting is needed to determine if our findings generalize. Second, clinicians may have needed more training with the AI tool to understand selective prediction. Formal training could mitigate the observed error tradeoff in this study by ensuring participants recognize that deferred conditions should still be considered for diagnosis and treatment. We use clinical decisions as a test-bed to examine the effects of selective prediction in a multilabel setting, but our findings generalize beyond healthcare. AI systems that augment human decisions are often developed in a vacuum, optimized alone for retrospective performance. Yet, integrating AI into human workflows is just as important as optimizing AI accuracy alone. Acknowledgments This work was supported by grant R01 HL158626 from the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI). We thank the members of the MLD3 Lab and Fouhey AI Lab for their valuable feedback on this work and countless tests of our survey before deployment. Special thanks to Winston Chen, Trenton Chang, Meera Krishnamoorthy, and Donna Tjandra for their feedback on framing and drafts of this work. References Adams et al. (2022) Adams, R.; Henry, K. E.; Sridharan, A.; Soleimani, H.; Zhan, A.; Rawat, N.; Johnson, L.; Hager, D. N.; Cosgrove, S. E.; Markowski, A.; et al. 2022. Prospective, multi-site study of patient outcomes after implementation of the TREWS machine learning-based early warning system for sepsis. Nature medicine , 28(7): 1455–1460. Araújo, Gomes, and Ribeiro (2024) Araújo, B.; Gomes, S. F.; and Ribeiro, L. 2024. Critical thinking pedagogical practices in medical education: a systematic review. Frontiers in Medicine , 11: 1358444. Banovic et al. (2023) Banovic, N.; Yang, Z.; Ramesh, A.; and Liu, A. 2023. Being trustworthy is not enough: How untrustworthy artificial intelligence (AI) can deceive the end-users and gain their trust. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction , 7(CSCW1): 1–17. Bansal et al. (2021) Bansal, G.; Wu, T.; Zhou, J.; Fok, R.; Nushi, B.; Kamar, E.; Ribeiro, M. T.; and Weld, D. 2021. Does the whole exceed its parts? the effect of ai explanations on complementary team performance. In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems , 1–16. Beery, Morris, and Yang (2019) Beery, S.; Morris, D.; and Yang, S. 2019. Efficient pipeline for camera trap image review. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.06772 . Bondi et al. (2022) Bondi, E.; Koster, R.; Sheahan, H.; Chadwick, M.; Bachrach, Y.; Cemgil, T.; Paquet, U.; and Dvijotham, K. 2022. Role of human-AI interaction in selective prediction. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 36, 5286–5294. Buçinca, Malaya, and Gajos (2021) Buçinca, Z.; Malaya, M. B.; and Gajos, K. Z. 2021. To trust or to think: cognitive forcing functions can reduce overreliance on AI in AI-assisted decision-making. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-computer Interaction , 5(CSCW1): 1–21. Chen et al. (2023) Chen, J.; Yoon, J.; Ebrahimi, S.; Arik, S.; Jha, S.; and Pfister, T. 2023. ASPEST: Bridging the Gap Between Active Learning and Selective Prediction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.03870 . Chow (1970) Chow, C. 1970. On optimum recognition error and reject tradeoff. IEEE Transactions on information theory , 16(1): 41–46. Clayton (1996) Clayton, D. G. 1996. Generalized linear mixed models. Markov chain Monte Carlo in practice , 1: 275–302. Davison (1997) Davison, A. 1997. Bootstrap methods and their application . Cambridge University Press. De-Arteaga, Fogliato, and Chouldechova (2020) De-Arteaga, M.; Fogliato, R.; and Chouldechova, A. 2020. A case for humans-in-the-loop: Decisions in the presence of erroneous algorithmic scores. In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 1–12. Dong and Hayes (2012) Dong, X.; and Hayes, C. C. 2012. Uncertainty visualizations: Helping decision makers become more aware of uncertainty and its implications. Journal of Cognitive Engineering and Decision Making , 6(1): 30–56. El-Yaniv and Wiener (2010) El-Yaniv, R.; and Wiener, Y. 2010. On the Foundations of Noise-free Selective Classification. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 11(5). Farzaneh et al. (2023) Farzaneh, N.; Ansari, S.; Lee, E.; Ward, K. R.; and Sjoding, M. W. 2023. Collaborative strategies for deploying artificial intelligence to complement physician diagnoses of acute respiratory distress syndrome. NPJ Digital Medicine , 6(1): 62. Gajos and Mamykina (2022) Gajos, K. Z.; and Mamykina, L. 2022. Do people engage cognitively with AI? Impact of AI assistance on incidental learning. In Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces , 794–806. Gaube et al. (2021) Gaube, S.; Suresh, H.; Raue, M.; Merritt, A.; Berkowitz, S. J.; Lermer, E.; Coughlin, J. F.; Guttag, J. V.; Colak, E.; and Ghassemi, M. 2021. Do as AI say: susceptibility in deployment of clinical decision-aids. NPJ digital medicine , 4(1): 31. Gkatzia, Lemon, and Rieser (2016) Gkatzia, D.; Lemon, O.; and Rieser, V. 2016. Natural language generation enhances human decision-making with uncertain information. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.03254 . Goldberger et al. (2000) Goldberger, A. L.; Amaral, L. A.; Glass, L.; Hausdorff, J. M.; Ivanov, P. C.; Mark, R. G.; Mietus, J. E.; Moody, G. B.; Peng, C.-K.; and Stanley, H. E. 2000. PhysioBank, PhysioToolkit, and PhysioNet: components of a new research resource for complex physiologic signals. circulation , 101(23): e215–e220. Gopal et al. (2021) Gopal, D. P.; Chetty, U.; O’Donnell, P.; Gajria, C.; and Blackadder-Weinstein, J. 2021. Implicit bias in healthcare: clinical practice, research and decision making. Future healthcare journal , 8(1): 40–48. Gulshan et al. (2016) Gulshan, V.; Peng, L.; Coram, M.; Stumpe, M. C.; Wu, D.; Narayanaswamy, A.; Venugopalan, S.; Widner, K.; Madams, T.; Cuadros, J.; et al. 2016. Development and validation of a deep learning algorithm for detection of diabetic retinopathy in retinal fundus photographs. jama , 316(22): 2402–2410. Irvin et al. (2019) Irvin, J.; Rajpurkar, P.; Ko, M.; Yu, Y.; Ciurea-Ilcus, S.; Chute, C.; Marklund, H.; Haghgoo, B.; Ball, R.; Shpanskaya, K.; et al. 2019. Chexpert: A large chest radiograph dataset with uncertainty labels and expert comparison. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence , volume 33, 590–597. Jabbour et al. (2022) Jabbour, S.; Fouhey, D.; Kazerooni, E.; Wiens, J.; and Sjoding, M. W. 2022. Combining chest X-rays and electronic health record (EHR) data using machine learning to diagnose acute respiratory failure. Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association , 29(6): 1060–1068. Jabbour et al. (2023) Jabbour, S.; Fouhey, D.; Shepard, S.; Valley, T. S.; Kazerooni, E. A.; Banovic, N.; Wiens, J.; and Sjoding, M. W. 2023. Measuring the impact of AI in the diagnosis of hospitalized patients: a randomized clinical vignette survey study. Jama , 330(23): 2275–2284. Johnson et al. (2024) Johnson, A.; Pollard, T.; Mark, R.; Berkowitz, S.; and Horng, S. 2024. Mimic-cxr database. PhysioNet10 , 13026: C2JT1Q. Johnson et al. (2019) Johnson, A. E.; Pollard, T. J.; Berkowitz, S. J.; Greenbaum, N. R.; Lungren, M. P.; Deng, C.-y.; Mark, R. G.; and Horng, S. 2019. MIMIC-CXR, a de-identified publicly available database of chest radiographs with free-text reports. Scientific data , 6(1): 317. Kempker et al. (2020) Kempker, J. A.; Abril, M. K.; Chen, Y.; Kramer, M. R.; Waller, L. A.; and Martin, G. S. 2020. The epidemiology of respiratory failure in the United States 2002–2017: a serial cross-sectional study. Critical Care Explorations , 2(6): e0128. Kim et al. (2024) Kim, S. S.; Liao, Q. V.; Vorvoreanu, M.; Ballard, S.; and Vaughan, J. W. 2024. ” I’m Not Sure, But…”: Examining the Impact of Large Language Models’ Uncertainty Expression on User Reliance and Trust. In The 2024 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency , 822–835. Lai, Liu, and Tan (2020) Lai, V.; Liu, H.; and Tan, C. 2020. ” Why is’ Chicago’deceptive?” Towards Building Model-Driven Tutorials for Humans. In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 1–13. Lai and Tan (2019) Lai, V.; and Tan, C. 2019. On human predictions with explanations and predictions of machine learning models: A case study on deception detection. In Proceedings of the conference on fairness, accountability, and transparency , 29–38. Lakkaraju and Bastani (2020) Lakkaraju, H.; and Bastani, O. 2020. ” How do I fool you?” Manipulating User Trust via Misleading Black Box Explanations. In Proceedings of the AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society , 79–85. Lambe et al. (2016) Lambe, K. A.; O’Reilly, G.; Kelly, B. D.; and Curristan, S. 2016. Dual-process cognitive interventions to enhance diagnostic reasoning: a systematic review. BMJ quality &amp; safety , 25(10): 808–820. Li and Passonneau (2024) Li, Z.; and Passonneau, R. J. 2024. Joint Training for Selective Prediction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.24029 . Lykouris and Weng (2024) Lykouris, T.; and Weng, W. 2024. Learning to defer in content moderation: The human-ai interplay. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.12237 . McKinney et al. (2020) McKinney, S. M.; Sieniek, M.; Godbole, V.; Godwin, J.; Antropova, N.; Ashrafian, H.; Back, T.; Chesus, M.; Corrado, G. S.; Darzi, A.; et al. 2020. International evaluation of an AI system for breast cancer screening. Nature , 577(7788): 89–94. Mozannar et al. (2023) Mozannar, H.; Lang, H.; Wei, D.; Sattigeri, P.; Das, S.; and Sontag, D. 2023. Who should predict? exact algorithms for learning to defer to humans. In International conference on artificial intelligence and statistics , 10520–10545. PMLR. Nam et al. (2022) Nam, B.; Kim, J. Y.; Kim, I. Y.; and Cho, B. H. 2022. Selective prediction with long short-term memory using unit-wise batch standardization for time series health data sets: algorithm development and validation. JMIR Medical Informatics , 10(3): e30587. Nori et al. (2023) Nori, H.; King, N.; McKinney, S. M.; Carignan, D.; and Horvitz, E. 2023. Capabilities of gpt-4 on medical challenge problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.13375 . Norman et al. (2017) Norman, G. R.; Monteiro, S. D.; Sherbino, J.; Ilgen, J. S.; Schmidt, H. G.; and Mamede, S. 2017. The causes of errors in clinical reasoning: cognitive biases, knowledge deficits, and dual process thinking. Academic Medicine , 92(1): 23–30. Prabhudesai et al. (2023) Prabhudesai, S.; Yang, L.; Asthana, S.; Huan, X.; Liao, Q. V.; and Banovic, N. 2023. Understanding Uncertainty: How Lay Decision-makers Perceive and Interpret Uncertainty in Human-AI Decision Making. In Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces , IUI ’23, 379–396. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9798400701061. Schemmer et al. (2023) Schemmer, M.; Kuehl, N.; Benz, C.; Bartos, A.; and Satzger, G. 2023. Appropriate reliance on AI advice: Conceptualization and the effect of explanations. In Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces , 410–422. Shah et al. (2022) Shah, A.; Bu, Y.; Lee, J. K.; Das, S.; Panda, R.; Sattigeri, P.; and Wornell, G. W. 2022. Selective regression under fairness criteria. In International Conference on Machine Learning , 19598–19615. PMLR. Sivaraman et al. (2023) Sivaraman, V.; Bukowski, L. A.; Levin, J.; Kahn, J. M.; and Perer, A. 2023. Ignore, trust, or negotiate: understanding clinician acceptance of AI-based treatment recommendations in health care. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 1–18. Smith (2023) Smith, T. M. 2023. What’s the difference between physician assistants and physicians? Strong, Men, and Noble (2025) Strong, J.; Men, Q.; and Noble, J. A. 2025. Trustworthy and Practical AI for Healthcare: A Guided Deferral System with Large Language Models. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 39, 28413–28421. Wang et al. (2023) Wang, D.-Y.; Ding, J.; Sun, A.-L.; Liu, S.-G.; Jiang, D.; Li, N.; and Yu, J.-K. 2023. Artificial intelligence suppression as a strategy to mitigate artificial intelligence automation bias. Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association , 30(10): 1684–1692. Zhang, Liao, and Bellamy (2020) Zhang, Y.; Liao, Q. V.; and Bellamy, R. K. 2020. Effect of confidence and explanation on accuracy and trust calibration in AI-assisted decision making. In Proceedings of the 2020 conference on fairness, accountability, and transparency , 295–305. Zwaan et al. (2012) Zwaan, L.; Thijs, A.; Wagner, C.; van der Wal, G.; and Timmermans, D. R. 2012. Relating faults in diagnostic reasoning with diagnostic errors and patient harm. Academic Medicine , 87(2): 149–156. Appendix Appendix A Survey Setup Study Invitations. We identified physicians at each hospital who sent an invitation email with the study information to hospitalist clinicians (those who treat patients with ARF) at their respective institutions. Landing Page. Once participants clicked on the study link, they were screened for eligibility. Specifically, they needed to confirm their role as a nurse practitioner, physician assistant, resident, fellow, attending physician, or any similar role. If they responded “no,” the study was terminated. Otherwise, they were redirected to an introduction page. On the introduction page, they were invited to participate in a research study aimed at understanding how clinicians might use clinical decision support tools in their diagnostic and treatment decisions. They were told they’d be presented with 9 cases based on real patient encounters that were de-identified, and would be asked about the likelihood of various diagnoses, what treatments they would provide, and how difficult they perceived the cases to be. They were also asked to give their best answer to each question and to treat each patient as if it were a real clinical encounter. They were informed that the study was anonymous, it would take about 20 minutes to complete, and that they could stop the study at any time and come back to the point where they left off. So as to not bias their answers, they were also told that some details of the study’s purpose would be withheld. They were also informed that they would receive a $50 Amazon.com gift card upon completion of the study. Study Instructions. Participants were told that they’d see a clinical decision support tool that was designed to determine the cause or causes of a patient’s ARF. To not skew their perception of the tool before seeing it in the study, they were then shown an example of how the tool would work if it was designed to identify objects in consumer images (Figure 9 ). IRB Approval. This study was exempt from IRB review, as it was deemed human subjects research with adults that involve benign (non-harmful) behavioral interventions, information was collected through written responses, no physiological data was collected, subject identifiers were not collected, and the subjects agreed to participate in the intervention and information collection. However, we collected the patient data to generate clinical cases under a separate approved IRB protocol. Knowledge Check. When randomized to Clinician + Selective Prediction , participants were required to answer a question to confirm their understanding of selective prediction (Figure 8 ). Participants were required to answer correctly, otherwise they couldn’t continue the survey. Survey Validation. During survey pilot testing, we ensured the randomization worked as intended. However, after data collection was complete, we identified an issue with the selection of the first three clinical cases without AI input. While still randomly sampled, some participants encountered a patient case first without AI and then later with AI. To assess any potential impact, we reran our analyses excluding the second occurrence of the case and found no effect on our results. Therefore, we retained all case responses in our analyses for completeness. Unusual Survey Responses. While the survey was live, we observed 13 individuals completing it unusually quickly at a non-typical hour. Given this suspicious behavior, we contacted them to verify their medical training and eligibility but received no responses. To ensure our sample consisted of medical professionals caring for ARF patients, we excluded their responses. We still ensured we collected 250 total responses as our power calculations intended, separate from removing the 13 suspicious responses. Figure 8: Knowledge check for those randomized to Clinician + Selective Prediction . Figure 9: Instructions presented to participants about the AI model they would be presented with. (a) The model was described as a clinical decision support tool to all participants, and they were shown how it would behave if it were used to identify objects in consumer photographs. (b) If randomized to Clinician + AI , participants were shown how the model would present all predictions. (c) If randomized to Clinician + Selective Prediction , participants were shown how the model would behave if it deferred for a subset of the predictions. Appendix B Patient Cases Selecting Patient Cases. We constructed 45 clinical patient cases based on real patients selected from a consecutive sample of 121 patients hospitalized with ARF at our institution between August and November of 2017. Patients used in the clinical cases were selected to ensure the sample was generally representative of patients hospitalized with ARF. Ground Truth Diagnosis. The ground truth diagnosis of each patient was determined by at least four physicians who typically care for ARF patients. They independently reviewed each patient’s medical record to determine if pneumonia, heart failure, and/or COPD was the patient’s underlying cause of the ARF on a scale of 1 to 4, with 1 being likely and 4 being unlikely. Scores were averaged and thresholded at 2.5 to indicate whether the patient had the disease, and patients could have any combination of the three (or none at all). In addition to determining the underlying cause of ARF (including pneumonia, heart failure, and/or COPD), each physician also gave a difficulty rating on a scale of 1-4 to describe the difficulty of diagnosing the specific patient case. Next, the 45 patients ultimately used in the study were selected from the larger group of 121 patients based on ensuring the sample was generally representative of patients hospitalized with ARF. This included ensuring the 45 patients selected had similar diagnostic difficulty across the three diagnoses studied (heart failure, pneumonia, and COPD) and similar diagnostic difficulty to the larger group of 121 patients. Finally, ensuring the 45 patients were selected to ensure disease prevalence for heart failure, pneumonia,and COPD was similar to the prevalence reported in prior national reports. Case Development. The clinical cases were developed iteratively by the study team members and piloted with 15 board certified internal medicine physicians not involved in the final study. First, a physician study team member reviewed the patient’s hospital admission history and physical exam and created an abbreviated version of each for the case. The patient’s chest X-ray image and laboratory data were also collected and added to the case. A pilot study was conducted with the draft cases, AI model predictions, where clinicians provided qualitative feedback on study layout, case content, survey questions, and time required to complete each case. Improvements were made to the cases iteratively until clinicians consistently agreed that the case provided sufficient information to conduct the diagnostic assessments required during the study. After incorporating all participant feedback from the initial pilot, a nurse clinical informaticist not involved in the research study reviewed each finalized case to ensure no identifiable patient information was present. Appendix C Model details To generate model predictions, we trained a machine learning model to predict pneumonia, heart failure, and COPD from the patients’ chest X-rays and tabular clinical data. Two separate models were trained: one based on chest X-rays and the second on EHR data. To generate a final prediction for each patient, we then averaged the image- and EHR-based model predictions, so as to weight the chest radiographs and EHR data equally. We ensembled the predictions of two separate models based on the clinical data and chest X-rays as follows: 1. EHR model : We trained a logistic regression and 2-layer neural network (1 hidden layer, size=100) with a sigmoid activation to estimate the probability of each diagnosis based on EHR data inputs, treating the model architecture as a hyperparameter. The best EHR model, either logistic regression or 2-layer neural network, was chosen based on validation AUROC performance. 2. Image model : We trained a convolutional neural network (CNN) with a DenseNet-121 architecture to estimate the probability of each diagnosis based on the chest X-ray input. The model was first pretrained using X-rays from two publicly available datasets, CheXpert ( Irvin et al. 2019 ) and MIMIC-CXR ( Johnson et al. 2019 ; Johnson et al. 2024 ; Goldberger et al. 2000 ) to identify common radiographic findings annotated in radiology reports. Then the last layer of the model was fine-tuned to determine ARF diagnoses. Model predictions were shown as follows: model outputs were on a scale of 0-1. These outputs were then thresholded to yield a model decision. Predictions less than the threshold were deemed as the model predicting no disease, and predictions greater than the threshold as model predicting disease. Thresholds were set to the percent of positive patients for each disease using all the data except the 45 patients used to test the model. We measured the percent of positive patients for each disease in this dataset (pneumonia: 31%, heart failure: 22%, COPD: 8%). For each diagnosis, we chose the threshold to be such that the percentage of patients labeled positive by the model was equal to the incidence rate of the diagnosis across this dataset. After thresholding, negative predictions were normalized to 0-50, and positive predictions were normalized to 51-100 so that the decision threshold shown to participants was the midpoint between 0 and 100. Scores were presented on a scale of 0-100, with 0 being unlikely and 100 being likely. Appendix D Randomization We developed a block randomization procedure to assign specific clinical cases to study participants. The block randomization procedure was used to randomize study participants to see AI model predictions with or without selective prediction. At the same time, it also ensured that all 45 patient cases would be evenly assigned across the first three baseline cases, and ensured that a subject would only see a specific clinical case once during the survey. The randomization was performed in blocks of to 90 achieve the two randomizations (AI with and without selective prediction) This ensured that all 45 patient cases would be evenly assigned across the first three baseline cases, and to ensure that a subject would only see a clinical case once during the survey. Within the blocks of 90, 45 subjects were randomly assigned to each randomization. There were six cases where the AI model was displayed. Three cases contained both inaccurate and accurate predictions and were sampled from 23 patients. The other three cases contained only accurate predictions coming from 22 patients. Therefore, the three cases that included inaccurate predictions were sampled from the corresponding 23 patients such that each patient was seen 11 or 12 times within the block. The three cases that only include accurate predictions were sampled from the corresponding 22 patients such that each patient was seen 12 or 13 times within the block. These six patient cases were then displayed in a random order. Appendix E Power Calculations The primary goal of the study was to understand the impact of inaccurate AI and AI with selective prediction on clinician accuracy. Answering these questions required making specific diagnostic accuracy comparisons across 3 experimental settings ( Clinician Alone ), ( Clinician + AI ), ( Clinician + Selective Prediction ). The power calculation focused on ensuring adequate power to detect differences in accuracy across these experimental settings. In the Clinician + AI setting, participants were shown a lower accuracy prediction for the diagnosis. When calculating diagnostic accuracy in the Clinician + AI setting, only inaccurate predictions were used from the three cases in which inaccurate predictions were shown. For this reason, the power calculations were designed to ensure adequate power in detecting the effects of Clinician + AI and Clinician + AI with respect to inaccurate predictions. We aimed to recruit 250 participants via simulation-based power calculations, which ensured adequate power to detect a 10% decrease in diagnostic accuracy with highly inaccurate AI, and then a recovery to baseline accuracy with selective prediction. Appendix F Participant Characteristics We collected optional demographic information after participants completed all cases in the study. We report these full demographic results here. Randomization Clinician + AI Clinician + Selective Prediction Total Responses, n 125 134 Number Complete Responses, n (%) 125 (100%) 134 (100%) Response Time (Minutes), median (IQR) 19 (14-28) 20 (15-32) Age, median (IQR) 35 (32-39) 35 (31-41) Years of Practice, median (IQR) 5 (2-10) 5 (2-9) Interaction with AI=Yes, n (%) 37 (27.6) 41 (32.8) Gender, n (%) Female 72 (53.7) 66 (52.8) Male 61 (45.5) 54 (43.2) Prefer not to say 1 (0.7) 5 (4.0) General Practice Area, n (%) Hospital Medicine 128 (95.5) 119 (95.2) Other 5 (3.7) 6 (4.8) Cardiology 1 (0.7) 0 (0.0) Role on Healthcare Team, n (%) Attending Physician 98 (73.7) 87 (69.6) Physician Assistant 25 (18.8) 27 (21.6) Nurse Practitioner (NP) 6 (4.5) 8 (6.4) Resident/Fellow 4 (3.0) 2 (1.6) Other 0 (0.0) 1 (0.8) Hospital Setting, n (%) University Hospital/Academic 115 (92.0) 117 (87.3) Community Hospital/Private Practice 11 (8.8) 19 (14.2) VA/Government 7 (5.6) 4 (3.0) Race/Ethnicity, n (%) Asian 35 (28.0) 38 (28.4) Black 0 (0.0) 5 (3.7) Hispanic or Latinx 3 (2.4) 5 (3.7) Middle Eastern 5 (4.0) 8 (6.0) Other 1 (0.8) 1 (0.7) Prefer not to say 12 (9.6) 10 (7.5) White 72 (57.6) 71 (53.0) Table 1: Study participant characteristics. Appendix G Performance in the inaccurate subset Here we report the numerical values of all Figures 5 and 6 in the main text for improved understanding of our results. Overall APP Physician Diagnosis Clinician Alone 0.66 (0.56-0.75) 0.72 (0.57-0.83) 0.65 (0.55-0.74) Clinician + AI 0.56 (0.46-0.66)** 0.51 (0.35-0.67) 0.59 (0.48-0.69) Clinician + Selective Prediction 0.64 (0.54-0.73) 0.66 (0.49-0.79) 0.63 (0.53-0.73) Treatment Clinician Alone 0.64 (0.54-0.73) 0.68 (0.54-0.80) 0.63 (0.52-0.73) Clinician + AI 0.53 (0.42-0.63)** 0.51 (0.36-0.65) 0.54 (0.43-0.65) Clinician + Selective Prediction 0.58 (0.47-0.67) 0.63 (0.49-0.76) 0.56 (0.45-0.67) Table 2: Overall participant diagnostic and treatment accuracy for the inaccurate subset with 95% confidence intervals. When provided with inaccurate predictions ( Clinician + AI ), participant accuracy drops significantly compared to baseline ( Clinician Alone ). When presented with selective prediction ( Clinician + Selective Prediction ) accuracy recovers close to baseline. These trends held for both APPs and physicians. Key: p-value &lt; &lt; 0.05: ∗ * ; p-value &lt; &lt; 0.01: ∗ ⁣ ∗ ** . Diagnosis Overall APP Physician False Positive Rate Clinician Alone 0.27 (0.14-0.45) 0.20 (0.07-0.47) 0.26 (0.14-0.45) Clinician + AI 0.43 (0.25-0.62)** 0.49 (0.23-0.76) 0.39 (0.22-0.60) Clinician + Selective Prediction 0.21 (0.10-0.37) 0.16 (0.05-0.43) 0.21 (0.11-0.38) False Negative Rate Clinician Alone 0.39 (0.30-0.48) 0.32 (0.18-0.50) 0.41 (0.32-0.50) Clinician + AI 0.44 (0.35-0.54) 0.48 (0.30-0.66) 0.43 (0.34-0.53) Clinician + Selective Prediction 0.46 (0.37-0.56) 0.42 (0.26-0.60) 0.48 (0.39-0.57) Treatment Overall APP Physician False Positive Rate Clinician Alone 0.38 (0.22-0.57) 0.31 (0.13-0.58) 0.39 (0.23-0.59) Clinician + AI 0.53 (0.34-0.71)* 0.55 (0.30-0.78) 0.51 (0.32-0.70) Clinician + Selective Prediction 0.40 (0.23-0.59) 0.23 (0.08-0.50) 0.42 (0.25-0.62) False Negative Rate Clinician Alone 0.31 (0.22-0.42) 0.31 (0.18-0.47) 0.32 (0.22-0.44) Clinician + AI 0.41 (0.31-0.53)* 0.43 (0.28-0.59) 0.40 (0.29-0.52) Clinician + Selective Prediction 0.42 (0.31-0.53)* 0.41 (0.27-0.57) 0.43 (0.32-0.55) Table 3: Average false positive and false negative rates with 95% confidence intervals for diagnosis and treatment decisions for clinician responses to the inaccurate subset. Showing clinicians inaccurate predictions ( Clinician + AI ) increase false positive and negatives compared to their baseline ( Clinician Alone ). When presented with selective prediction, false positives return to lower than baseline, while false negatives stay elevated. These trends held for APPs and physicians. Key: p-value &lt; &lt; 0.05: ∗ * ; p-value &lt; &lt; 0.01: ∗ ⁣ ∗ ** . Appendix H Difficulty We report numerical values for Figure 7 in the main text. Overall APP Physician Clinician Alone 1.17 (1.13-1.21) 1.25 (1.17-1.34) 1.14 (1.09-1.18) Clinician + AI 1.20 (1.16-1.25) 1.27 (1.18-1.36) 1.17 (1.12-1.22) Clinician + Selective Prediction 1.27 (1.23-1.32) 1.36 (1.26-1.47) 1.24 (1.19-1.3) Table 4: Average difficulty rating and corresponding 95% confidence intervals on the inaccurate subset. Participant difficulty rating increased when shown all AI predictions ( Clinician + AI ) and increased further when shown AI with selective prediction ( Clinician + Selective Prediction ) Appendix I Performance in the accurate subset Here, we report participant performance on responses to the accurate subset of conditions. We make two comparisons. First, we measure clinician performance at baseline on the accurate subset ( Clinician Alone Acc {}_{\textnormal{Acc}} ). Then, we compare to two groups: clinician performance on the accurate subset when randomized to AI without selective prediction ( Clinician + AI Acc {}_{\textnormal{Acc}} ) and clinician performance on the accurate subset when randomized to AI with selective prediction ( Clinician + Selective Prediction Acc {}_{\textnormal{Acc}} ) (though note that they still see all predictions for the accurate subset when the AI defers on the inaccurate subset). Clinician accuracy improves with accurate AI predictions. At baseline ( Clinician Alone Acc {}_{\textnormal{Acc}} ), clinician diagnostic accuracy on the accurate subset without AI input is 80% (75-85) (Figure 10 , Table 5 ). Clinician accuracy increases significantly when presented accurate predictions both without ( Clinician + AI Acc {}_{\textnormal{Acc}} = = 85% [81-89]) and with ( Clinician + AI Acc {}_{\textnormal{Acc}} = = 86% [81-89]) selective prediction. Improvements in accuracy are also reflected in lower false positive and false negative rates in both settings ( Clinician + AI Acc {}_{\textnormal{Acc}} , Clinician + Selective Prediction Acc {}_{\textnormal{Acc}} ), though differences from baseline ( Clinician Alone Acc {}_{\textnormal{Acc}} ) are not statistically significant (Table 6 ). However, clinician performance remains below that of the AI model. Overall APP Physician Diagnosis Clinician Alone Acc {}_{\textnormal{Acc}} 0.80 (0.75-0.85) 0.76 (0.69-0.82) 0.82 (0.76-0.87) Clinician + AI Acc {}_{\textnormal{Acc}} 0.85 (0.81-0.89)** 0.82 (0.76-0.87) 0.86 (0.81-0.90) Clinician + Selective Prediction Acc {}_{\textnormal{Acc}} 0.86 (0.81-0.90)** 0.84 (0.78-0.89) 0.87 (0.82-0.91) Treatment Clinician Alone Acc {}_{\textnormal{Acc}} 0.77 (0.70-0.82) 0.77 (0.68-0.83) 0.77 (0.70-0.82) Clinician + AI Acc {}_{\textnormal{Acc}} 0.81 (0.76-0.86)** 0.82 (0.74-0.87) 0.81 (0.76-0.86) Clinician + Selective Prediction Acc {}_{\textnormal{Acc}} 0.83 (0.78-0.87)** 0.83 (0.76-0.89) 0.83 (0.78-0.87) Table 5: Overall participant diagnostic and treatment accuracy for the accurate subset in the different settings with 95% confidence intervals. Key: p-value &lt; &lt; 0.05: ∗ * ; p-value &lt; &lt; 0.01: ∗ ⁣ ∗ ** . Figure 10: Diagnostic and treatment accuracy in the accurate subset. Participant accuracy improves significantly when shown accurate AI predictions, both with and without selective prediction, compared to baseline. However, their performance remains below that of the AI model. Diagnosis Overall APP Physician False Positive Rate Clinician Alone Acc {}_{\textnormal{Acc}} 0.15 (0.09-0.24) 0.25 (0.15-0.38) 0.13 (0.07-0.22) Clinician + AI Acc {}_{\textnormal{Acc}} 0.11 (0.06-0.17) 0.13 (0.07-0.23) 0.10 (0.06-0.17) Clinician + Selective Prediction Acc {}_{\textnormal{Acc}} 0.11 (0.06-0.17) 0.14 (0.08-0.25) 0.10 (0.05-0.17) False Negative Rate Clinician Alone Acc {}_{\textnormal{Acc}} 0.27 (0.12-0.50) 0.25 (0.09-0.52) 0.27 (0.11-0.52) Clinician + AI Acc {}_{\textnormal{Acc}} 0.17 (0.07-0.36) 0.13 (0.04-0.34) 0.18 (0.07-0.40) Clinician + Selective Prediction Acc {}_{\textnormal{Acc}} 0.20 (0.08-0.40) 0.20 (0.07-0.47) 0.18 (0.07-0.39) Treatment Overall APP Physician False Positive Rate Clinician Alone Acc {}_{\textnormal{Acc}} 0.19 (0.12-0.30) 0.23 (0.14-0.37) 0.18 (0.11-0.29) Clinician + AI Acc {}_{\textnormal{Acc}} 0.13 (0.07-0.21) 0.14 (0.08-0.25) 0.13 (0.07-0.21) Clinician + Selective Prediction Acc {}_{\textnormal{Acc}} 0.15 (0.09-0.25) 0.16 (0.09-0.28) 0.15 (0.09-0.24) False Negative Rate Clinician Alone Acc {}_{\textnormal{Acc}} 0.29 (0.14-0.51) 0.21 (0.07-0.48) 0.33 (0.17-0.54) Clinician + AI Acc {}_{\textnormal{Acc}} 0.22 (0.10-0.43) 0.21 (0.07-0.47) 0.23 (0.11-0.43) Clinician + Selective Prediction Acc {}_{\textnormal{Acc}} 0.22 (0.10-0.42) 0.20 (0.07-0.48) 0.23 (0.11-0.41) Table 6: False positive and false negative rates for diagnosis and treatment in the accurate subset. Error rates decrease when shown accurate AI compared to baseline, though not significantly. ◄ Feeling lucky? Conversion report Report an issue View&nbsp;original on&nbsp;arXiv ► Copyright Privacy Policy Generated by L a T e XML oxide