                                            Bayes-ically fair: A Bayesian Ranking of the Olympic
                                                                 Medal Table
                                                            C. MacDermott, C.J. Scarrott, J. Ferguson
                                               School of Mathematical and Statistical Sciences, University of Galway
arXiv:2510.14723v1 [stat.AP] 16 Oct 2025




                                                                                October 17, 2025


                                                                                      Abstract
                                                     Evaluating a country’s sporting success provides insight into its decision-making
                                                 and infrastructure for developing athletic talent. The Olympic Games serve as a
                                                 global benchmark, yet conventional medal rankings can be unduly influenced by pop-
                                                 ulation size. We propose a Bayesian ranking scheme to rank the performance of
                                                 National Olympic Committees by their ‘long-run’ medals to population ratio. The
                                                 algorithm aims to mitigate the influence of large populations and reduce the stochas-
                                                 tic fluctuations for smaller nations by applying shrinkage. These long-run rankings
                                                 provide a more stable and interpretable ordering of national sporting performance
                                                 across games compared to existing methods.

                                               Keywords: hierarchical models, sports statistics, medal probability


                                           1     Introduction
                                           The Olympic Games represent the pinnacle of international sporting competition, offering
                                           a global stage to evaluate national athletic success. Every four years, elite athletes from na-
                                           tions and territories represented by National Olympic Committees (NOCs) compete across
                                           a wide variety of sports for ‘Olympic glory’. As such, medal tables, comparing the rela-
                                           tive performance of differing NOCs, are examined by media outlets and sports authorities
                                           world-wide. Particular scrutiny goes on how many medals their home country has won,
                                           where they rank compared to other nations, and how their performance compares with
                                           previous Games.
                                               During the 2024 Olympic Games in Paris, one of the key narratives centered on whether
                                           the United States or China would top the standard lexicographic ordering of the medal
                                           table, which ranks nations primarily by gold medal count. Both finished with 40 gold
                                           medals, but the United States was placed ahead due to its higher overall medal tally.
                                               However, while total medal counts are a common point of media focus, they inherently
                                           favor more populous NOCs, as these have a larger pool of athletes to draw from. For
                                           example, Ireland will never top a medal table based purely on total counts, as the sheer

                                                                                          1
disparity in population makes it virtually impossible to compete with nations hundreds of
times larger. To address this imbalance, an alternative approach is to scale medal counts by
population, producing the so-called ‘per-capita’ table. However, these tables are also crude
in that they fail to recognize inherent stochasticity over repeated Olympic cycles, which
on a relative scale will be large for smaller countries. The result is that the per-capita
table is typically led by small population countries. For instance, Grenada, Dominica and
Saint Lucia, with respective populations of 112,579; 67,408 and 184,100 occupied the top
3 positions on the 2024 per-capita table.
    In response to these limitations, approaches have been proposed in the scientific liter-
ature to create alternative rankings. These approaches can be divided into methods that
challenge the standard ranking produced by the number of gold medals (or total medals) by
(1) reweighing the contributions of gold, silver and bronze medals in various ways (Ogwang
and Cho, 2021), (2) producing composite tables combining medal tables ordered by differ-
ing criteria (Cao et al., 2016), and (3) ranking performance relative to collective resources
available to a particular country, as specified by variables such as population and GDP
using approaches like Data Envelope Analysis (Lozano et al., 2002; Bernard and Busse,
2004; Churilov and Flitman, 2006; Wu et al., 2009; Li et al., 2015; Flegl and Andrade,
2018), and linear regression (Halsey, 2009).
    Finally, the method recently proposed by Duncan and Parece (2024) has received sub-
stantial attention in various popular media outlets around the world, like the The New
York Times (Coy, 2024) and The Guardian (Ryan and Nicholas, 2024) who referred to it
as the Goldilocks method due to not favoring large or small countries. The Duncan-Parece
method ranks according to a novel probabilistic index that adjusts for population effects,
which we will compare and contrast to our own approach below.
    In this article, we propose Bayesian ranking as an alternative method to order medal
tables. Unlike the traditional approaches, Bayesian ranking focuses on the most likely
ordering of the key parameters of interest that drive the observed data (Laird and Louis,
1989). In the Olympic medal setting, we can informally define these key parameters as
the long-run per-capita medal ratios that would be observed in differing countries if the
Olympics were repeated several times under differing conditions. In other words, the medal
table we produce via Bayesian ranking does not aim to summarize what happened in a
particular Olympic Games – but instead to infer which countries are most efficient in
producing Olympic medalists, relative to their population size over the long term.
    In the case that the data from a single Olympics is used, the ranking produced could
be considered a modification of the ranking by the observed per-capita medal ratios. For
large countries such as the USA and China, the Bayesian estimates of long-term per-capita
ratios will closely resemble observed values, given their large populations and relatively
stable performance. In contrast, for smaller countries, the Bayesian estimates may diverge
significantly from observed ratios, as their medal counts are more susceptible to stochastic
variation within a single Olympic cycle.
    A key consideration in this approach is the choice of prior distribution for these un-
derlying long-term ratios, as the reliability of the rankings relies on how reasonable the
prior is. Hierarchical Bayesian modeling, as used in the methods discussed later, mitigates
some subjectivity by leveraging the observed distribution of medal counts across countries


                                             2
to help estimate the prior, thereby enhancing the robustness of the resulting rankings.
    In Section 2, we will describe our Bayesian ranking model in detail, with careful dis-
cussion regarding the plausible validity of our modeling assumptions. In Section 3, we
examine the medal tables produced by our approach over the last six Olympic cycles, and
contrast with the results produced by the recent algorithm proposed by Duncan and Parece
(2024) mentioned above. In Section 4, we provide additional evaluation and justification of
our modeling assumptions, and discuss both caveats as well as possible extensions of our
approach.


2    Methods
The National Olympic Committees (NOCs) represent each country, as well as the individual
athletes from the Refugee Olympic Team. The C NOCs that competed at a games are
indexed by c = 1, . . . , C and the total population size per NOC is given by nc . These vary
in each Olympic Games, but for notational convenience we’ll ignore this in the following
presentation which will focus on the NOCs in Paris 2024 (C = 204). As with the usual
per-capita analysis, only NOCs with a measurable population are included. The total
number of medals won by country c is the sum of the number of medals won by their
individual athletes Mc = 1 × M1,c + 2 × M2,c + · · · , where Mi,c is the random variable for
the number of their athletes that won exactly i medals. Here each medal-winning country
in team competitions such as relays or field sports is considered a nominal athlete that wins
a single medal, which is in keeping with the official lexiographic ranking compiled by the
International Olympic Committee. The total number of medals achieved by each country
c will be modeled using a combination of interrelated Poisson processes representing the
number of athletes Mi,c winning exactly i medals.
    If we momentarily ignore the number of total  P medals, Mc , and consider only the num-
ber of unique medal winning athletes, Uc =          i Mi,c , we can assume Uc to be roughly
Poisson distributed. The Poisson distribution is used as an approximation to the con-
ceptual idea that the number of unique medal winners from country c is approximately a
Uc ∼ Binomial(nc , pc ) distribution, where a unique medal winner is considered a rare event
from a large number nc of independent Bernoulli trials representing each person within a
population with probability of success pc . The binomial/Poisson assumptions are considered
in Section 4.
    However, care has to be taken with modeling total medals won, Mc , as the world’s
highest achieving athletes that win more than one medal would invalidate the Poisson
limiting assumption that it should be impossible to have two or more events at the same
instance. Hence, we will instead model the number of athletes winning i = 1, 2, . . . as
conditionally independent Poisson processes, that are interlinked via a prescribed relation-
ship between the country-specific impacts on the probability of winning that number of
medals.P Note that this assumption implies that the number of unique medal winners,
Uc = i Mi,c will follow a Poisson distribution, whereas the total number of medals won
Mc = 1 × M1,c + 2 × M2,c + · · · , will not.
    In Paris 2024 the highest number of medals won by any individual athlete was four


                                             3
medals, so for notational convenience we will denote M4,c as the number of athletes winning
four or more medals, and so we only consider the finite sum to M4,c . It is straightforward
to adapt the modeling framework to allow for a different number of medals won by an
individual athlete. The number of athletes winning i = 1, 2, 3 and 4 or more medals in
each competing country are assumed to be Poisson distributed:

                                 M1,c   ∼   Poisson(λ1,c ),
                                 M2,c   ∼   Poisson(λ2,c ),
                                 M3,c   ∼   Poisson(λ3,c ), and
                                 M4,c   ∼   Poisson(λ4,c ).


The expected number (and variance) of athletes winning each number of medals is then
λi,c = nc pi,c , where pi,c = P (Xc = i) is the probability of an individual Xc from competing
country c winning exactly i medals. Again, for convenience in notation p4,c = P (Xc ≥ 4).
The country-specific Poisson distributions are equivalent to a classical frequentist inference
of a country-specific random effect on the probability of a winning that number of medals.
    These Poisson distributions are treated as independent of each other, conditional on
those country-specific probabilities p1,c , p2,c , p3,c and p4,c of an individual winning a given
number of medals. The relationship between these probabilities is defined through param-
eters for the following conditional probabilities:

  pc   =   P (Xc ≥ 1) i.e., the probability of athlete from c being a unique medal winner,
  q2   =   P (X ≥ 2 | X ≥ 1) ,
  q3   =   P (X ≥ 3 | X ≥ 2) , and
  q4   =   P (X ≥ 4 | X ≥ 3) .

The probability of being a unique medal winner pc retains the country-specific subscript
notation. In contrast, the consecutive conditional probabilities qi of winning at least one
additional medal having already won i medals are not country-specific, once the condition-
ing on being a unique medal winner from that NOC is taken into account. There is a slight
abuse of notation here in that these conditional probabilities depend on the country-specific
random variable Xc ≥ 1 for being unique medal winner, but we use the random variable
X to represent the number of medals won by an individual from a generic NOC winning
that number of medals.
    The country-specific effect of population biology, demography, and the ability to develop
sporting talent is assumed to be entirely driven through the parameter for the chance of
producing a unique medal winner pc = P (Xc ≥ 1). The above framework then assumes that
conditional on someone being a medal winner, the likelihood of winning further medals has
no further country-specific effects. This assumption seems reasonable as when conditioning
on the rare event of winning one or more medals, we are implicitly conditioning on an
athlete that has the talent, training environment and funding to perform at a world class
level in their chosen sport; the conditional probability of winning more than one medal
given this context might be largely independent of the athlete’s home country. These

                                               4
multi-medal winning athletes are also sufficiently rare that they will not be very influential
on the rankings inference, except for the small countries that have been fortunate enough
to host such talent. Indeed we see no substantive change in the results presented when
only the unique medal winning athletes are modelled.
    From a computational view this construction has the benefit of not needing country
specific random effects for these multi-medal winning probabilities which would be hard
to inform from the data as the majority of countries have no such athletes. The country-
specific probabilities of being a unique medal winner are more reliably estimated as there
are based on a larger number of such athletes.
    The unconditional probability of an individual from country c of winning a certain
number of medals will vary by country according to:

          p1,c = P (Xc = 1)   =   P (Xc ≥ 1) − P (Xc ≥ 2) = pc (1 − q2 ),
          p2,c = P (Xc = 2)   =   P (Xc ≥ 2) − P (Xc ≥ 3) = pc q2 (1 − q3 ),
          p3,c = P (Xc = 3)   =   P (Xc ≥ 3) − P (Xc ≥ 4) = pc q2 q3 (1 − q4 ), and
          p4,c = P (Xc ≥ 4)   =   p c q2 q3 q4 .

These parameters are given uninformative and independent prior distributions of

                                  q2 ∼ Uniform(0,1),
                                  q3 ∼ Uniform(0,1), and
                                  q4 ∼ Uniform(0,1),

so that they are predominantly learnt from the data. The country-specific probability of
an individual becoming a unique medal winner is assumed to follow a prior distribution:

                                      pc ∼ Beta(α, β),

where α and β are given independent uniform hyperprior distributions:

                                  α ∼ Uniform(0, 1), and
                                  β ∼ Uniform(0, 108 ).

    Note that sensible values for α and β should correspond to an expected medal prob-
                                                    α
ability from the associated beta-prior: E(pc ) = α+β   , that is relatively close to the total
number of medals divided by the global population (1039/8, 000, 000, 000 = 1.3 × 10−7 for
Paris 2024). However, this information has not been hardcoded into the model: instead,
the non-informative hyperpriors give the model the flexibility to learn the most plausible
values for α and β based on the observed medal counts across differing countries.
    The priors induce shrinkage to reduce the uncertainty for small countries which have
limited sample information by pulling their estimates towards the global average, while
preserving the data-driven estimates for larger countries. The pooling of information across
all countries for the multi-medal winning athletes also ensures they do not have undue
influences on the estimates for small countries. The shrinkage provides a better estimate
of the ‘long-run’ probability of winning medals, which would provide a more stable ranking

                                              5
of each nation’s performance. Alternative prior specifications are considered in the online
Appendix, with little sensitivity to this choice found.
    In summary, we have just four parameters to obtain a posterior distribution for each
country; namely the country-specific random effect for the probability of a unique medal
winner pc = P (Xc ≥ 1), and the three conditional probabilities of such an athlete winning
further medals qi = P (X ≥ i | X ≥ i − 1) for i = 2, 3 and 4.
    The population size data are obtained from the United Nations Nations (2025) which
are updated for each Olympic year. The Olympics data are obtained from the International
Olympic Committee (2025). Gibbs sampling using the rJAGS package (Plummer, 2024) is
used to draw posterior samples of (pc , q2 , q3 , q4 ) for each country, which are then transformed
as above to country-specific medal probabilities, and subsequently to expected per-capita
medal ratios: E(Mc /nc ) = p1,c +2 p2,c +· · · . The rank for the expected per-capita number of
medals won in a particular country, among all medal-winning countries, is then calculated
for each posterior sample. Finally, the estimated posterior mean of these ranks is used to
order the medal table as is commonplace in the Bayesian ranking literature. Alternative
statistics, like the posterior median rank, that could be used for the ranking are considered
in Section 4.
    Finally, it is worth noting that while we base our ranking on the posterior distribution
of the expected medal rate per capita E(Mc /nc ) in the above, this is equivalent to ranking
on the probability of an individual from that country winning at least one medal pc =
P (Xc ≥ 1), which is easily seen by expansion of expectation:

        E(Mc /nc ) = E(M1,c /nc ) + 2 E(M2,c /nc ) + 3 E(M3,c /nc ) + 4 E(M4,c /nc )
                   = pc (1 − q2 + 2 q2 (1 − q3 ) + 3 q2 q3 (1 − q4 ) + 4 q2 q3 q4 )

where the terms in the bracket are not country specific.


3     Results
Table 1 presents the Bayesian ranking of the top ten and selected countries from Paris
2024. The posterior mean rank over those countries that won at least one medal is used to
order the table. As per usual approaches, the NOCs that did not win any medals are not
ranked. Population size, total medals won, observed per-capita medal winning rates and
rankings by these observed rates, as well as the Duncan and Parece (2024) U -index are also
provided for comparison. The posterior median medal winning rate per million and 95%
credible intervals for uncertainty estimation are provided.
    The posterior median is utilized due to the strong skewness in the credible intervals
for smaller countries to be discussed in Section 3.3. It is worth noting that the posterior
median rate does not follow exactly the same ordering as the posterior ranks due their
skewness. A Shiny app is available from MacDermott et al. (2025), which allows users
to explore the different rankings (including the posterior median rank, as an alternative)
across all NOCs, including demographic comparisons for the last six Olympic Games going
back to Athens 2004.


                                                6
         Ranks                               Country                       Medals per million   Credible Interval
 Posterior Per-   U -Index   Name             Code Population      Medal   Observed Posterior   95%     95%
 Mean capita                                      (thousands)      Total            Median      Lower   Upper

     1       4          6    New Zealand      NZL          5,214   20      3.84     3.31        2.05    4.89
     2       7          1    Australia        AUS         26,713   53      1.98     1.80        1.32    2.31
     3       8          8    Hungary          HUN          9,676   19      1.96     1.83        1.06    2.89
     4      10          4    Netherlands      NLD         18,229   34      1.87     1.68        1.15    2.40
     5       1         27    Grenada          GRD            117   2       17.09    2.42        0.34    8.16
     6       6         18    Jamaica          JAM          2,839   6       2.11     1.71        0.67    3.54
     7       5         25    Bahrain          BHR          1,607   4       2.49     1.74        0.53    4.25
     8      11         15    Georgia          GEO          3,808   7       1.84     1.58        0.65    3.00
     9      12         17    Croatia          HRV          3,875   7       1.81     1.60        0.65    3.10
    10      13         13    Denmark          DNK          5,977   9       1.51     1.35        0.64    2.50
    15      18         20    Ireland          IRL          5,255   7       1.33     1.01        0.42    2.04
    16      24          2    France           FRA         66,549   64      0.96     0.95        0.72    1.22
    17      25          3    Great Britain    GBR         69,138   65      0.94     0.95        0.72    1.21
    21       2         41    Dominica         DMA             66   1       15.15    1.10        0.06    5.64
    24       3         29    Saint Lucia      LCA            180   2       11.11    0.96        0.05    4.98
    46      42         43    Hong Kong        HKG          7,415   4       0.54     0.36        0.09    0.96
    51      48          5    United States    USA        345,427   126     0.36     0.34        0.29    0.41
    76      76        114    China            CHN      1,419,321   91      0.06     0.06        0.05    0.08


Table 1: Bayesian ranking of the top 10 and selected countries in Paris 2024 by posterior
estimates of medal-winning probabilities, normalized per million population, including 95%
credible intervals. The Duncan-Parece U -index based ranks are provided.

3.1      Bayesian Shrinkage and Ranking Stability
As mentioned, a key feature of the Bayesian ranking approach is its shrinkage effect, which
adjusts for small-sample uncertainty. It prevents countries with exceptionally high per-
capita medal counts from being overemphasized from a single-event which may not persist
over the long-term. The shrinkage can be seen for Grenada in Table 1 having an observed
medals per million of 17 (rank 1 per-capita), which decreased to 2.42 (Bayesian rank 5).
Similarly, Dominica and Saint Lucia were ranked second and third on a per-capita basis,
but have been shrunk to 21 and 24 respectively in the Bayesian ranking. Using Bayesian
ranking, New Zealand, Australia and Hungary are ranked as the top 3, but under the per-
capita rate it would be Grenada, Dominica and then Saint Lucia, a combination which is
unlikely to be seen again in future Olympics. The Bayesian shrinkage results in a more
stable and interpretable ranking compared to naive per-capita methods, which tend to
disproportionately favor smaller nations.
    The performances of larger countries are well informed by the sample data, so see
relatively little change in the posterior inference. The USA and China achieved the same
number of gold medals, the USA won both more silver and bronze medals so are ranked first
in the official lexicographic medal table. But in the per-capita rankings they are placed as
48 and 76 respectively, due to their very large population sizes. The shrinkage is minimal
for such large countries with the the USA moving down 3 positions to 51 in the Bayesian
rank and China only 1 rank up to 75. The slightly larger change for the USA is discussed
further in Section 3.2.
    In Figure 1 we can see the shrinkage effect across all countries, by comparing the

                                                         7
Figure 1: Comparison of posterior median and observed medal winning rates by population
size for each country with at least one medallist. Directed arrows indicate the shrinkage
effect from observed per-capita rates to posterior estimates. The 95% credible intervals
for the medal rate per million are shown by the gray lines, with boundary range ticks.
Those countries with any multi-medal athletes are shown as a different color and flags
mark countries listed in Table 1.

observed and posterior median per-capita medal probabilities. The smaller nations on the
left of the graph are pulled closer to the global mean, reflecting the underlying uncertainty
in their success rates. In contrast, larger countries on the right see little effect of the prior,
as their rankings are more data-driven.
    It is worth noting that the level of shrinkage is a function of three factors: (1) the
population size, (2) the number of medals won by each NOC (note that these first two
factors pertain to the observed medal winning rate) and (3) whether there are any multi-
medal winning athletes. This feature can be seen by the shrinkage arrows having different
lengths for NOCs with similar population sizes which are close to each other on the x-axis.
Generally, if two NOCs have same population size and medal counts, the one with more
multi-medal winners will see more shrinkage to the global average which will be discussed
in Section 3.2. The NOCs with an unusually high medal count, for a given population
size, will see more shrinkage as is expected when providing more stable medal winning rate
estimates.

                                                8
    It should be noted that only medal winning countries are shown in Figure 1. However, a
consequence of the shrinkage is that NOCs that won no medals exhibit shrinkage upwards,
which is again to be expected to provide more stable medal winning rate estimates. This
shrinkage effect for non-medallist NOCs is discussed in more depth in the online Appendix.
It is of course important to include the non-medal winning NOCs in the inference, as they
inform the global average rates and their exclusion would lead to a bias.

3.2    Impact of Multi-Medal Winners on Bayesian Rankings
Another feature of the Bayesian ranking model is its emphasis on the number of unique
medal winners (and the number of medals they won) rather than the total medal count.
This feature of the model is a notable improvement over Duncan and Parece (2024) which
ignores the athletes that compete in several events and break the binomial assumption that
medals won in differing events are independent. The focus on the unique medal winners
also helps prevent a small number of extraordinary multi-medalists from disproportionately
inflating a country’s ranking. One must not diminish the achievement of such athletes, but
a goal here is to provide a more stable estimate of each NOC’s medal winning rate which
may be more reflective of the NOC’s ability to develop sporting talent. The outstanding
ability of such athletes is likely more driven by their individual genetic factors, and the
particular events they compete in (e.g. more multi-medal winners are seen in swimming
events), as opposed to being a strong indicator of an NOC’s talent development capability.
    This effect is illustrated in Figure 1, where countries with similar populations and
nearly identical total medal counts so are near each other on the graph (in both x and
y direction) exhibit different levels of shrinkage. The countries colored in purple have
multi-medal winners exhibit more shrinkage than those with unique medal winners only
which are colored in gold. For instance, in 2024 Ireland and Norway with essentially
the same populations won 7 and 8 medals respectively. Ireland’s medals were won by
six unique medalists, with one athlete winning multiple medals, while Norway’s medals
were distributed across eight different athletes. As another example, Grenada and Saint
Lucia are both small nations with similar populations that won two medals in Paris 2024.
They ranked 1 and 3 on the observed per capita table. However, because Saint Lucia’s
two medals were won by the same athlete, Julien Alfred, their estimated medal rate is
shrunk more than Grenada’s, whose two medals were won by separate athletes. Finally,
Hong Kong won four medals in 2024, but two of those were won by the swimmer Siobhán
Haughey, which explains the larger shrinkage applied to Hong Kong’s observed medal ratio
compared to similar size countries. This feature underscores the model’s tendency to favor
broader medal distribution across athletes rather than concentrated success among a few
high achieving individuals. This feature can also effect the degree of shrinkage applied to
bigger countries, albeit to a lesser extent as the absolute amount of shrinkage is smaller for
larger countries. For instance, USA moves by 3 positions in the ranking due to their 10
multi-medal winners winning 23 out of a total 126 medals, whereas China only moves by 1
position as they have only 3 multi-medal winners winning 7 out of there 91 medals.




                                              9
3.3    Ranking Uncertainty and Credible Intervals
On their own, the posterior mean ranks should not be used to compare the performance of
different countries, just like p-values should not be used to judge effect sizes, as they do not
account for uncertainty. To address this, credible intervals for every medal winning NOC
from Paris 2024 in Figure 2, in addition to the selection in Table 1, which provide a more
nuanced assessment of each NOC’s ranking stability.




Figure 2: Average Bayesian rank with 80% credible intervals for Paris 2024, ordered by
rank. Smaller nations exhibit wider credible intervals due to greater uncertainty in their
medal counts, while larger countries have more stable rankings.

    As expected, smaller countries exhibit wider credible intervals, reflecting greater ranking
uncertainty due to their limited sample sizes, while larger nations have more stable rankings.
Further, for well performing countries the rank distributions are right skewed due to the
natural bound at first rank and vice-verse for weakest performing countries bounded by
the bottom rank. The asymmetry is most clear for the smallest countries with the most
uncertainty.
    For example, the USA at posterior mean rank 48 has a very short (and symmetric)
credible intervals reflecting the large sample of competing athletes. New Zealand’s credible
interval does not overlap those of Australia and Hungary, reinforcing its standout position
as the top-performing country according to the Bayesian ranking. In contrast, Grenada’s

                                              10
credible interval overlaps substantially with those of many other small nations, suggest-
ing that its superior per-capita medal count may not represent a statistically meaningful
performance difference when accounting for sample uncertainty.
    In general, countries with fewer medal winners (and smaller populations) exhibit wider
credible intervals, while those with consistent performances across multiple events (typi-
cally larger nations) have more stable rankings. This highlights a key advantage of the
Bayesian approach with the credible intervals - it provides a probabilistic measure of rank-
ing uncertainty, ensuring that countries with overlapping intervals are not misinterpreted
as significantly different in performance despite differences in their rank positions.

3.4    Comparison with Duncan-Parece Method
The Bayesian posterior mean ranks based on the estimated medal-winning probabilities
presented in Table 1 differ significantly from the Duncan and Parece (2024) U -index rank-
ings. Under the Bayesian ranking, New Zealand, Australia, and Hungary rank among the
top-performing nations, while Grenada, despite its high observed per-capita medal count,
is ranked slightly lower due to the shrinkage effects. The USA and China have seen little
change in the Bayesian ranking compared to a per-capita rating.
    The Duncan-Parece method implicitly penalizes smaller countries in the rankings, as
their approach is essentially p-value based. It is well known that p-values are sample size
dependent (Wasserstein and Lazar, 2016). A small sample limits the evidence available,
even for a large effect size, so smaller NOCs cannot achieve the small p-values required to be
ranked highly, unless they attain an extraordinarily large number of medals relative to their
population size. As such the larger countries are given an advantage in the Duncan-Parece
method.
    The advantage given to large NOCs in the Duncan-Parece method is seen in Table 1
and Figure 3 by it assigning higher ranks to large countries like the USA at rank 5, Great
Britain at rank 3 and France at rank 2, which benefit from their overall representation of
athletes competing across events. In general, the Duncan-Parece U -index ranked countries
which are ranked highly have large population sizes. The only ranking scheme shown that
places higher priority on larger NOCs is the total medals based ranking in gray. The per-
capita based ranking generally gives priority to smaller NOCs. The Bayesian ranking can
be reasonably described as achieving a balance between smaller and larger nations, with a
mix of such nations achieving high ranks.

3.5    Long-term Stability of Bayesian Ranking
One of the key motivators for the Bayesian ranking approach is to provide a stable long-term
estimate of each NOC’s performance, based on a single Olympic Games, using shrinkage
effects whilst also accounting for population size effects. Section 3.1 demonstrated the
shrinkage effects and how they approach accounts for population size. Here we will evaluate
its ability to provide an interpretable long-term measure of performance by considering its
stability and behavior when applied to many past Olympic Games.
    The Bayesian ranking method is applied entirely separately for each of the last 6


                                             11
Figure 3: Comparison of rankings across different methods for Paris 2024 as a function of
population size. Bayesian rank (purple), U -index rank (orange), total medals rank (dashed
dark gray), and per-capita medals rank (dashed light gray) are shown. Notably, the U -
index closely follows the total medal count ranking, highlighting its tendency to favor larger
nations, while the Bayesian ranking adjusts for population size.

Olympic Games, so there is no carryover of information across Olympic Games in the
inference. Notice the strong consistency in the Bayesian ranking for each NOC shown
across these 6 Games, which provides comfort in the interpretation of the ranks as a stable
long-term estimate of each NOC’s performance, due to the shrinkage effects. In particular,
New Zealand topped the ranks in the last 4 Olympic Games after a notable improvement
since Athens 2004 which is known to be influenced by increases in funding and strat-
egy/policy priority changes resulting from the creation of Sparc (now Sports NZ) and its
subsidiary High Performance Sports NZ which were formed in 2002 and 2012 respectively.
The Netherlands have made consistent gains since 2008. Hungary did not perform so well
in Beijing 2008, but otherwise ranked very highly. Similarly, Georgia has performed con-
sistently well. Jamaica dropped from a consistent rank of 2-3 in size Beijing 2008 to rank
6 in Paris 2024. Interestingly, both Grenada and Bahrain performed sufficiently well in
Paris 2024 to appear in the Top 10 for the first time, despite the shrinkage applied to their
estimates.


                                             12
Figure 4: Top 10 ranked countries across the last 6 Olympic Games. Every country that
is within the Top 10 in any Game is joined to their rank across all 6 games.

4    Discussion
In this final section, we discuss some of the assumptions behind our model, possible ways
it might be extended and more detailed comparison to the Duncan and Parece (2024)
method. We first examine the equal treatment of medal types and the validity of the Poisson
assumption. We then discuss the assumption of constant conditional probabilities for multi-
medal winners across countries. Finally, we compare our Bayesian ranking algorithm to
existing probabilistic approaches, particularly the Duncan-Parece method, and highlight
key advantages of our approach in capturing long-term national Olympic performance.
    Throughout the analysis we have treated all medals equally, but we could have consid-
ered either separate Poisson processes for each type of medal or having a weighting scheme
for each type of medal. The former medal type specific Poisson process would have many
zeroes and therefore limit the information to the likelihood. In this case, the inference
would be strongly influenced by the priors which is best avoided. Previous literature has
justified treating gold, silver and bronze medals equally. For instance, Bian et al. (2005)
has argued that the performances winning gold, silver and bronze medals are often very
similar, with a degree of luck being the crucial determining factor, which partially justifies


                                             13
equal weighting. Ogwang and Cho (2021) also found that the first principal component
estimated from the joint distribution of gold, silver and bronze medal totals across coun-
tries had approximately equal weight on the number of gold, silver and bronze medals and
explains over 94% of the total variance, indicating very strong correlation in the gold, silver
and bronze medal counts across different countries.
    The Poisson assumption, as a limiting approximation to the binomial distribution for
the number of unique medal winners per country, can be empirically tested using observed
medal counts over multiple Olympic Games. Assuming that a country’s true medal-winning
rate remains stable across successive Olympic cycles, we have considered diagnostic plots of
estimated mean and variance, and hypothesis tests to detect possible excess-Poisson varia-
tion (see the online Appendix). These tests provide support for the Poisson approximation.
While there are obvious physical limitations to the binomial argument that total medals
can be regarded as a sum of equal probability Bernoulli trials, these are likely negligible
in practice. For example, factors such age, socioeconomic conditions, and race may influ-
ence the likelihood of individual success in different events. However, even if individual
probabilities vary the total medal counts can still be reasonably modeled using a Poisson
distribution (with rate scaled by population size) as long as individual successes or failures
can be treated as independent events. The assumption of independence is somewhat more
difficult to justify. On one hand, given the rarity of athletes with the talent to win an
Olympic medal, it seems reasonable to treat these individuals as independent rare events.
On the other hand, the notion that ‘a rising tide lifts all boats’ should be acknowledged -
training environments, national sports culture, and psychological factors can create perfor-
mance spillover effects, particularly in elite competitive sports.
    Recall the model assumes that the conditional probabilities of an individual winning
two or more medals, given that they have won at least one medal are constant across
all countries. We have partially justified this assumption under the premise that when
conditioning on an Olympic medal winner, one is implicitly conditioning on having the
training environment, funding and genetic talent to compete as a world class athletes (i.e.
we are mostly conditioning away those factors that might cause differing levels of success
per-capita across countries). However, if a country focuses their resources on particular
sports (such as swimming) where multi-medal winners are more likely, the true conditional
probabilities for that country of winning multiple medals given a single medal may be larger
than the global average. Unfortunately, there is not enough data from a single Olympic
Games to estimate these conditional probabilities in a coherent way at a per-country level,
particularly for smaller countries and, as such, complete pooling represents an attractive
modeling assumption from a practical standpoint. In practice, the effects of incorporating
such corrections in our ranking (which would in any case be driven primarily by single
medal winners who constitute the vast majority of medals) would be unlikely to change
the conclusions. To elaborate further, since the conditional probabilities are not country
specific, the shrinkage applied to a country’s raw per-capita medal rate by our model will
tend to be slightly larger if its medals were won by disproportionally few athletes compared
to a scenario where the same number of medals were won by separate athletes. This effect
may have resulted in the USA doing slightly worse in the Bayesian ranking for Paris 2024
(position 51) compared to the observed per-capita ranking (position 48). However, as


                                              14
shown in Figure 2, the practical differences in performance between countries ranked as
51 and 48 by Bayesian ranking is statistically negligible due to the strongly overlapping
credible intervals.
    To produce a ranking, we have summarized the posterior distribution of the rank for a
country’s medal rate by its mean. As demonstrated in Figure 2, the posterior distributions
of highly-placed smaller countries tend to be quite right skewed compared to larger coun-
tries, with the result that they may be ranked less advantageously using the posterior mean
rank compared to using the posterior median rank. For instance, Grenada would be ranked
as the 2nd best country in Paris 2024 according to posterior median rank, as opposed to
5th with posterior mean rank, although the other positions in the top 10 are identical to
those in Table 1, having accounted for that shift. Effectively, the posterior mean rank ap-
plies a relative penalty to the ranking of smaller countries with asymmetric high-variability
posterior distributions, compared to countries that have symmetric posteriors. We have
chosen the posterior mean rank as it is in keeping with previous applications of Bayesian
ranking, such as Laird and Louis (1989), but posterior median rank could equally be used
to create the ranking table. Alternative rankings (such as rankings based on the posterior
median) can be explored using the Shiny app at MacDermott et al. (2025)
    The goal of our model is to infer which countries are most efficient in producing Olympic
medalists relative to their population size. This population-scaled efficiency is a subjective
definition of success, and may not be something that a country strives for given that some
Olympic events have more prestige and glamour than others. For instance, while the
United States places at 51 on our Bayesian ranking table (despite winning the table on
standard lexicographic medal counts), it does particularly well in many of the ‘marquee’
track and field events that enjoy particular media attention. Many factors might influence
this relative Olympic success such as GDP per capita, the proportion of GDP allocated to
sports funding, climate, demographic and social factors. If the aim was to instead infer
which countries were most successful given fixed values of such variables, such factors could
be accounted for in a Bayesian Poisson regression, which again used log-population size as
an offset in modeling the probability of a unique medal, and incorporated a normal random
effect for each country, with the inferred value of this random effect used to rank differing
NOCs. The implicit prior for medal winning probabilities across countries would be log-
normal (as opposed to beta) in this modified model, but with shifts in the mean parameter
based on the covariate information for a NOC.
    This brings up another point of discussion. How much influence does the hierarchically
estimated beta prior influence the overall results and ranking? The choice of beta rather
than log-normal or some other choice is a subjective choice, and could be considered as a
weakness of our model by some. It turns out that the exact choice of hierarchical prior
has relatively little influence in the final results. We have also investigated hierarchical
specifications of log-normal, logit normal and mixture-beta priors for the probability of a
unique medal (see the online Appendix for details). In all models, New Zealand is ranked as
the best performing NOC, and the top 5 and top 10 ranked countries are consistent across
all models, with slightly differing orderings based on the implied shrinkage. In particular,
the results from the mixture beta prior are almost identical to the results above. Given
that the mixture beta has theoretical advantages in that it can adapt to the most general


                                             15
distribution of probabilities across countries, it is comforting that the results from the beta
and mixture beta priors are so similar.
    Finally we return to the approach of Duncan and Parece (2024), which ranks by the
likelihood of achieving a country’s observed medal count (or higher) under a binomial
model. That is, the model considers possible awarded medals to a country as independent
Bernoulli trials with probability success proportional to the country’s population. One nice
feature of their approach is their binomial probability implicitly respects the total quota
of possible Olympic medals that a country can win. For instance, in Tokyo 2021 the total
medals that a country could possibly win was 579 due to restrictions on the total number
of athletes that an NOC could enter. While this isn’t respected by our Poisson distribution
(which has infinite support), we note that in practice the probability distributions for total
medals corresponding to Poisson and binomial approaches are very similar again based on
the large n and small p approximation (See the online Appendix for more details).
    The Duncan-Parece method is effectively a transformed p-value that tests the null hy-
pothesis that the probability of a country winning a particular Olympic medal equals the
proportion of the aggregate population of countries that have previously won an Olympic
medal that resides in that country. The index tends to favorably rank higher population
countries. For example, in the Tokyo 2020 Olympics, the USA ranked 6th using Duncan-
Parece’s U -index, with a score of 15.2. However, if we imagine that both the population of
the USA and its medal count doubled, the U -index for the USA increases to 34, in which
case they would would be ranked as the top performing country. This is despite the USA’s
relative performance (in terms of medals per-capita) remaining unchanged. The effect just
described is due to a well known feature of p-values (Wasserstein and Lazar, 2016). Small
observed effects (such as small observed differences between country-specific and global
per-capita medal ratio) can correspond to extremely small p-values when the effect is es-
timated with small standard error (roughly the standard error for estimated per-capita
ratios are proportional to the square root of population). These issues have been previ-
ously discussed in the context of ranking effect sizes in genetics and genomics in Ferguson
and Chang (2020), and sheds some light on the differences in rankings produced by our
Bayesian ranking algorithm and their probabilistic index. To advocate for our approach,
as demonstrated in Section 3, New Zealand has led our Bayesian ranking algorithm con-
sistently over the previous four Olympic cycles, and they have also ‘topped’ the empirical
per-capita medal table over this collective period when restricting to countries that have
a population of at least 1,000,000; indicating that our algorithm is better at inferring the
countries with the best long-run performance even though we infer this performance from
a single Olympic Games.


5    Conclusion
In conclusion, our Bayesian ranking algorithm is a new approach way to rank each country’s
performance in international competitions such as the Olympic Games. It strikes a balance
between consideration of total medals, which would give an advantage to larger countries,
and empirical per-capita medal ratios which are overly influenced by stochastic factors


                                              16
pertaining to a particular Olympics and notable advantage the large number of smaller
nations.


References
Bernard, A. B. and M. R. Busse (2004). Who wins the Olympic Games: Economic resources
  and medal totals. Review of Economics and Statistics 86 (1), 413–417.

Bian, X. et al. (2005). Predicting Olympic medal counts: The effects of economic develop-
  ment on Olympic performance. The Park Place Economist 13 (1), 37–44.

Cao, X., Y. Fu, J. Du, J. Sun, and M. Wang (2016). Measuring Olympics performance based
  on a distance-based approach. International Transactions in Operational Research 23 (5),
  979–990.

Churilov, L. and A. Flitman (2006). Towards fair ranking of Olympics achievements: The
  case of Sydney 2000. Computers & Operations Research 33 (7), 2057–2082.

Coy, P. (2024). Which country will win the Paris Olympics? Don’t just count medals. The
  New York Times 07/22/24.

Duncan, R. C. and A. Parece (2024). Population-adjusted national rankings in the
 Olympics. Journal of Sports Analytics 10 (1), 87–104.

Ferguson, J. and J. Chang (2020). An empirical Bayesian ranking method, with applications
  to high throughput biology. Bioinformatics 36 (1), 177–185.

Flegl, M. and L. Andrade (2018). Measuring countries’ performance at the Summer
  Olympic Games in Rio 2016. Opsearch 55 (3), 823–846.

Halsey, L. G. (2009). The true success of nations at recent Olympic Games: Comparing
  actual versus expected medal success. Sport in Society 12 (10), 1353–1368.

International Olympic Committee (2025). Official Olympic Games Data.

Laird, N. M. and T. A. Louis (1989). Empirical Bayes ranking methods. Journal of
  Educational Statistics 14 (1), 29–46.

Li, Y., X. Lei, Q. Dai, and L. Liang (2015). Performance evaluation of participating
  nations at the 2012 London Summer Olympics by a two-stage data envelopment analysis.
  European Journal of Operational Research 243 (3), 964–973.

Lozano, S., G. Villa, F. Guerrero, and P. Cortés (2002). Measuring the performance
  of nations at the Summer Olympics using data envelopment analysis. Journal of the
  Operational Research Society 53 (5), 501–511.




                                           17
MacDermott, C., C. J. Scarrott, and J. Ferguson (2025). Interactive dashboard ex-
 ploring medal rankings. https://mq698p-carl-scarrott.shinyapps.io/Bayesian_
 Medal_Ranking_app/.

Nations, U. (2025). Un department of economics, population division - data downloads.

Ogwang, T. and D. I. Cho (2021). Olympic rankings based on objective weighting schemes.
 Journal of Applied Statistics 48 (3), 573–582.

Plummer, M. (2024). rjags: Bayesian Graphical Models using MCMC. R package version
  4-16.

Ryan, J. and J. Nicholas (2024). Ranking the medal table by gold, total, or most medals
  per capita – Who actually won at the Olympics? The Guardian 09/12/24.

Wasserstein, R. L. and N. A. Lazar (2016). The ASA statement on p-values: Context,
 process, and purpose. The American Statistician 70 (2), 129–133.

Wu, J., L. Liang, and Y. Chen (2009). DEA game cross-efficiency approach to Olympic
 rankings. Omega 37 (4), 909–918.




                                          18
Appendix
In this appendix we consider secondary details about the method and results. A Shiny
app is available from MacDermott et al. (2025) for interactively exploring the results of the
Bayesian ranking, including how the ranking might vary by country-specific demographic
factors and comparison to other ranking methods.


A      Bayesian Shrinkage and Ranking Stability
In the main paper we presented the shrinkage results for the medal winning countries in
Paris 2024. The shrinkage brings each country closer to the global average, as a means
to provide a more stable long-run estimate of their performance. The large countries see
little shrinkage as they are well informed by the data, while the smaller nations see more
shrinkage. The countries with one or more multi-medal winning athletes also saw more
shrinkage than those with only single medal winning athletes of a similar size, as the
multi-medal winning rate is assumed constant across all nations. Here we will explore the
(reverse) impact of the shrinkage of the countries who won no medals in Paris 2024
     In the main paper we presented the shrinkage results for the medal winning countries
in Paris 2024. The shrinkage brings each country closer to the global average, in order
to provide a more stable long-run estimate of their performance. The large countries see
little shrinkage as they are well informed by the data, whereas the smaller nations see
more shrinkage. The countries with one or more multi-medal winning athletes also saw
more shrinkage than those with single medal winning athletes of a similar size, as the
multi-medal winning rate is assumed constant across all nations. Here we will explore the
(reverse) impact of the shrinkage of the countries who won no medals in Paris 2024.
     The uplift of the medal winning rate for NOCs with no medalists can be seen in Figure 5
by the vertical arrows. The shrinkage for these NOCs is only affected by their population
size, as they have zero medal count and no multi-medal winners. Broadly speaking, there is
a monotonically decreasing inflation effect of the shrinkage with population size. The small-
est countries receive the biggest uplift towards the global average, as the larger populations’
estimates are more data-driven.
     The uplift of the medal winning rate for NOCs with no medalists can be seen in Figure 5
by the vertical arrows. The shrinkage for these NOCs is only affected by their population
size, as they have zero medal count and no multi-medal winners. Broadly speaking, there
is a monotonically decreasing inflation effect of the shrinkage with population size. The
smallest countries receive the biggest uplift towards the global average, as the larger popu-
lations’ estimates are more data-driven. The non-medal winning countries are not assigned
a rank in the Bayesian ranking, as per usual protocol.


        E(Mc /nc ) = pc (1 − q2 + 2 q2 (1 − q3 ) + 3 q2 q3 (1 − q4 ) + 4 q2 q3 q4 ) ≈ pc

   The non-medal winning countries are not assigned a rank in the Bayesian ranking,
as per usual protocol. However, if they were ranked they would be amongst the bottom


                                                19
Figure 5: Effect of shrinkage on the medal winning rate against population size for each
country that won a medal (as per Figure 1 of the main paper, and the inflation effect for
those who won no medals.

countries, which can be seen by the low height of their arrows compared to most medal
winning NOCs.


B     Approximate Equivalence to Duncan-Parece Method
The model underlying the proposed Bayesian ranking can be considered as an approxima-
tion to the Duncan and Parece (2024) method in the circumstance that the probabilities
pc , which we define in the Methods section of the main manuscript, are equal across com-
peting NOCs. The Duncan-Parece method models the number of medals won by a NOC
using a binomial distribution where each trial is one of the medals that an NOC could
win, up to the maximum possible number of medals, with a country specific probabil-
ity of winning. Under the quota system the maximum number of medals that could be
achieved was M = 559 trials for Paris 2024, out of a total of T = 1039 medals. Under
the assumption of equal medal winning capability for any individual around the world, the
expected number of medals won by a country is proportional to the country’s population
(see equation (4) of Duncan and Parece (2024)). But due to the close equivalence between


                                           20
the Poisson/binomial, you can view our per-capita specification as simply changing the
denominator term.
     The model underlying the proposed Bayesian ranking can be considered as an approxi-
mation to the Duncan and Parece (2024) method in the circumstance that the probabilities
pc , which we define in the Methods section of the main manuscript are equal across com-
peting NOCs. The Duncan-Parece method models the number of medals won by a NOC
using a binomial distribution where each trial is one of the medals that an NOC could
win, up to the maximum possible number of medals, with a country specific probabil-
ity of winning. Under the quota system the maximum number of medals that could be
achieved was M = 559 trials for Paris 2024, out of a total of T = 1039 medals. Under
the assumption of equal medal winning capability for any individual around the world, the
expected number of medals won by a country is proportional to the country’s population
(see equation (4) of Duncan and Parece (2024)). But due to the close equivalence between
the Poisson/binomial, you can view our per-capita specification as simply changing the
denominator term of the binomial probability.
     The population size for country c is nc and the total population of the world is N .
The Duncan-Parece model is that the number of medals won by any country is Mc ∼
Binomial(M, πc ) where πc is probability of that country winning a given medal. Under the
equal capability assumption (per person) across all NOCs, the expected number of medals
won should be proportional to that countries population so M × πc = nNc T . Rearranging
we obtain:
                                                 nc T
                                            πc =
                                                 NM
so under the equi-capability      reference model the number of potential medals follows a
               nc T
                                           is approximately a Poisson nNc T which in turn is
                    
Binomial M, N M . Such a binomial
                                T
                                  
approximately Binomial nc , N . The latter probability pc = T /N is per-capita probability
of an individual from a given NOC winning a medal underlying our model, assuming it
does not change over countries (that is pc is constant).
     Although the two underlying models approximate each other under the null equi-
capability reference model, our inference approach does not have the same restriction on
small countries due to the sample size impacts on the (transformed) p-values which un-
derlie the U -index of Duncan and Parece (2024). Another substantial improvement in our
method is the explicit handling of multi-medal winning athletes, which would break the
usual independence assumption of the binomial. A drawback of our approach compared to
Duncan and Parece (2024) is that we do not explicitly handle each country’s quota. How-
ever, even for the most successful countries, medal winning is a rare event so no country
get sufficiently close to their quota for this to be of concern.


C     Sensitivity to Prior Choice
The shrinkage which stabilizes the long-run estimates of expected medal winning perfor-
mance is mostly imposed by the choice of prior distribution (with only mild impacts from
the assumed common multi-medal winning probabilities across all NOCs). In the main


                                            21
      Country            Posterior Mean Ranks                   Medals per million                   Beta CI
            Population   Beta   Log-   Mixed-      Observed     Beta   Log-Normal    Mixed-Beta    95%     95%
           (thousands)          Normal Beta                   Median       Median       Median    Lower   Upper

     NZL         5,214      1      1       1         3.84       3.31         3.61          3.27    2.05    4.89
     AUS        26,713      2      3       2         1.98       1.80         1.82          1.79    1.32    2.31
     HUN         9,676      3      4       3         1.96       1.83         1.84          1.79    1.06    2.89
     NLD        18,229      4      5       4         1.87       1.68         1.73          1.71    1.15    2.40
     GRD           117      5      2       6        17.09       2.42         7.14          2.13    0.34    8.16
     JAM         2,839      6      7       5         2.11       1.71         1.82          1.68    0.67    3.54
     BHR         1,607      7      6       7         2.49       1.74         2.00          1.66    0.53    4.25
     GEO         3,808      8      8       8         1.84       1.58         1.68          1.56    0.65    3.00
     HRV         3,875      9      9       9         1.81       1.60         1.65          1.54    0.65    3.10
     DNK         5,977     10     10      10         1.51       1.35         1.42          1.40    0.64    2.50
     IRL         5,255     15     15      15         1.33       1.01         1.05          1.02    0.42    2.04
     FRA        66,549     16     16      16         0.96       0.95         0.95          0.95    0.72    1.22
     GBR        69,138     17     19      17         0.94       0.95         0.95          0.95    0.72    1.21
     USA       345,427     51     47      51         0.36       0.34         0.34          0.34    0.29    0.41
     CHN     1,419,321     76     78      77         0.06       0.06         0.06          0.06    0.05    0.08


Table 2: Bayesian ranking of the top 10 and selected countries in Paris 2024 based on poste-
rior estimates of medal-winning probabilities, normalized per million population. Rankings
are shown under different prior specifications: the beta prior, a log-normal prior, and a flex-
ible mixed-beta prior. The ranks are based on mean ranking of posterior mean probabilites.
Corresponding 95% credible intervals for the beta prior are also provided supporting the
appropriateness of the beta prior in the analysis.

paper, we present the results when a beta prior distribution is used to inform the country-
specific probability of an individual becoming a unique medal winner, pc = P (Xc ≥ 1),:

                                                pc ∼ Beta(α, β)

with hyperparameters:

                                        α ∼ Uniform(0, 1), and
                                        β ∼ Uniform(0, 108 ).

This prior is a natural choice and appears to produce sensible Bayesian rankings, but we
have also explored the sensitivity to alternative priors and their hyperparameters.
    Firstly, we considered a truncated log-normal prior distribution which allows for a heav-
ier upper tail for the prior distribution of the unique medal winner probability

                                       pc ∼ Log-Normal(µ, σ)I(0, 1)

with hyperparameters:

                                   µ ∼ Normal(−15, 0.323), and
                                   σ ∼ Gamma(0.001, 0.001)

where the gamma is parameterized by the shape and rate. The hyperprior for the mean
is chosen to be close to the overall medal winning rate over the world population. The

                                                      22
Figure 6: Effect of shrinkage on the medal-winning rate against population size for each
country that won a medal (as per Figure 1 of the main paper), and the inflation effect for
those who won no medals. for a log-normal prior with colours indicating how the shrinkage
compares under each model

resulting shrinkage is shown in Figure 6. The shrinkage is somewhat flatter compared
to the beta prior, so that the smaller countries like Grenada are not shrunk as much
as for the beta prior, and the larger countries experience notably more shrinkage. The
trajectory of shrinkage vs population for the non-medal winning countries is also notably
flatter compared to with the beta prior. The resultant rankings are shown in Table 2.
The beta prior is used as the reference, where a black font means no change, green is an
improvement in the ranked position and orange is a decline. The resulting ranks do not
change much compared to the beta prior. The key difference in the Top 10 is that Grenada
moves from rank 5 with the beta prior to 2nd place. But notice that the shrinkage for the
larger countries leads to the UK being slightly pulled down the ranks, and the USA and
Japan brought slightly up the ranks.
    The shrinkage for larger countries is indicative of the prior being informative over the
large amount of sample information, which is not desirable. In addition, it appears that
the heavy tail of the log-normal is allowing substantial variation in the probability of being
a unique medal winner, and subsequently higher posterior mass on extreme performance,
for countries with small populations. However, when one considers the uncertainty via the

                                             23
95% credible intervals for the medal winning rate (calculated from the beta specification)
these changes are not significant, as the estimated rates from the log-normal prior are well
within these intervals (although it is worth noting that the medal winning rate for Grenada
is close to the upper bound).
    A logit-normal prior:
                                  pc ∼ Logit-Normal(µ, σ)
with hyperparameters:

                              µ ∼ Normal(−15, 0.323), and
                              σ ∼ Gamma(0.001, 0.001)

gave near identical results to the log-normal, so are not discussed for brevity.




Figure 7: Effect of shrinkage on the medal-winning rate against population size for each
country that won a medal (as per Figure 1 of the main paper), and the inflation effect for
those who won no medals. for a mixed-beta prior with colours indicating how the shrinkage
compares under each model

    A very flexible mixture of beta components was also explored to assess the robustness of
the prior to heavy-tailed behavior. Three components were used, offering enough flexibility
to approximate characteristics of priors such as the log-normal, while including the standard

                                             24
beta prior as a special case. The three components

                                     pjc ∼ Beta(αj , βj )

for i = 1, 2, 3 have the same hyperparameters as for usual single beta prior as above. A
Dirichlet(1,1,1) distribution is used for the mixture weights for the three beta components.
The resulting shrinkage is shown in Figure 6 is very similar to using simple one component
beta prior which provides comfort in the results presented the main paper, as it appears
the choice of beta prior (and hyperparameters) is not strongly influential on the results
and the changes seen with the log-normal prior above are likely due to this prior specifica-
tion enforcing a unrealistically heavy tail that fails to adequately shrink highly stochastic
extreme rates for small NOCs.
    One subtle distinction, however, emerges at the tails: at large population sizes for non-
medal winners, the mixed-beta prior results in slightly less shrinkage than the regular beta.
This can occur because the mixture model may allocate higher-population observations
more weight from flatter components, which exert less shrinkage. However, these deviations
are minimal and affect only non-medal-winning countries, which are excluded from the final
rankings.


D     Poisson assumptions
Using the medal winning results across multiple Olympic Games we can evaluate the equal
mean/variance assumption of the Poisson model. Figure 8 plots the sample mean against
the variance of the number of medals for each NOC across all seven of the Olympic Games
from Athens 2004 to Paris 2024, shown on a log-scale. A non-medal winning country is
included as a zero for that Games, but a country which did not compete in the Games are
set to missing. You can clearly see a strong mean-variance relationship as the NOCs are
close to the line of equality. Some of the notable deviations from the line of equality are
due to host NOCs (Greece, China, UK, Brazil, Japan and France). But overall the equal
mean/variance assumption of the Poisson appears extremely reasonable.
     There is a mild crudeness to this evaluation due to the multi-medal winning athletes.
     P model, the total number of medals won by country c is Mc = 1 × M1,c + 2 × M2,c +
In our
· · · i i Mi.c . Each of the Mi,c is assumed to be Poisson distributed. But the total number
of medals won Mc is not exactly Poisson due to the scaling by the number of medals i, but
will be close to Poisson as the multi-medal winning athletes are sufficiently rare especially
as the total Mc will be dominated by the 1 × M1,c term which is exactly Poisson.
     Another aspect of approximation in this diagnostic plot is that it assumes the number of
medals on offer (including quotas of those available), population size, and the underlying
performance of each NOC (as measured by their long-term medal rate: E(Mc /nc )) are
constant over time. As we are considering only Games following Athens 2004 these factors
will not have changed much, and so is of little concern.
     As an alternative test of the Poisson assumption, we defined p-values to test for excess
Poisson variation in the medal counts over two successive Olympic Games, assuming perfor-
mance, the total number of medals on offer and population all remain stable. Under these

                                             25
assumptions (in addition to independence) conditional on R, that is the total medals won
over two sucessive games, the number of medals won by a country in a particular Games
has a binomial distribution with R trials and probability of success 0.5. The results are not
shown here, but the country-specific p-values demonstrated no evidence for super-Poisson
variability (with the notable exception of host countries).




Figure 8: Average medals over the seven previous Olympic games are plotted against the
empirical variance of the number of medals (y-axis), by country. Gross departures from
the line of equality signify possible violations of the Poisson assumption. The shaded area
represents a 90% predictive band for the empirical variance of a random sample of size
seven from the Poisson distribution.




                                             26
