Long-Sequence LSTM Modeling for NBA Game Outcome Prediction
              Using a Novel Multi-Season Dataset

           Charles Rios, Longzhen Han, Almas Baimagambetov and Nikolaos Polatidis*

   School of Architecture, Technology and Engineering, University of Brighton, Brighton, U.K

                        *Corresponding author: N.Polatidis@Brighton.ac.uk



                                               Abstract

Predicting the outcomes of professional basketball games, particularly in the National Basketball
Association (NBA), has become increasingly important for coaching strategy, fan engagement, and
sports betting. However, many existing prediction models struggle with concept drift, limited
temporal context, and instability across seasons. To advance forecasting in this domain, we introduce
a newly constructed longitudinal NBA dataset covering the 2004–05 to 2024–25 seasons and present
a deep learning framework designed to model long-term performance trends. Our primary
contribution is a Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) architecture that leverages an extended
sequence length of 9,840 games equivalent to eight full NBA seasons to capture evolving team
dynamics and season-over-season dependencies. We compare this model against several traditional
Machine Learning (ML) and Deep Learning (DL) baselines, including Logistic Regression, Random
Forest, Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP), and Convolutional Neural Network (CNN). The LSTM
achieves the best performance across all metrics, with 72.35% accuracy, 73.15% precision and
76.13% AUC-ROC. These results demonstrate the importance of long-sequence temporal modeling
in basketball outcome prediction and highlight the value of our new multi-season dataset for
developing robust, generalizable NBA forecasting systems.

Keywords: NBA, Basketball, Match outcome prediction, Neural Networks

1. Introduction
Artificial intelligence has reshaped the ways we look at many topics, particularly sports. The use of
AI in sports science has grown steadily within the recent years as shown with the technological
innovation in sports leagues such as MLB, NBA, NFL. In this paper, our focus is on AI in the NBA
for regular season game outcome prediction. It is evident that artificial intelligence has considerably
aided in sports through multiple mediums [1-3]. Performance metrics, injury risk assessment [4], fan
engagement and management are only some of the areas where AI has consistently proved its
usefulness in sports. Use of AI in these areas provides major benefits towards increase in revenue
for team managers and the sports league, decrease in injury for players, and better evaluation of a
player’s performance.
        Although, exploring gaps that these tools fail to fill is necessary to utilize them efficiently.
The replacement of human roles has been a major concern in all fields embracing AI, causing the
widespread fear of displacement of human workers [5]. With this possible future of replacing human
roles with AI, the user of AI must consider the quality and reliability of them. This brings us into
another overlooked issue in AI with its need for reliability. These systems will require rigorous
testing and thoughtful design, otherwise breaking down and causing problems will be more likely
than solving them. Finally, one of the most pressing issues with AI use in sports is the inability to
generalize well. This stems from new regulations, ever-changing nature of sports, new playstyles
being adopted, and persisting attempts to maintain a fan’s engagement.
        Therefore, it is essential to be as efficient as possible with the data on hand as to create reliable
and performant AI systems. Concept drift, which is when patterns learned in the past no longer apply
effectively to the present, is a major concern in the space of AI sports models as it creates data that
is no longer usable for the present’s problems. This is shown through large contributors towards
predictive power, like team rosters and gameplay style, significantly changing overtime. This leads
to accuracy dropping as the season continues, affecting model stability and requires retraining on
new data. Our new design could potentially address this issue and gain more use out of existing data.
Many academics assert the idea that data from older, less recent seasons harm the model’s
performance. Although, this creates an environment where it’s hard to develop models that can
generalize and accurately predict across multiple seasons. In despite of that, we show that data from
these seasons can still be taken advantage of to improve not only performance but resilience and
robustness.
        Our proposal of fallback or generalizable models in AI sports fills gaps in what is currently
used. The replacement of human roles will not be affected by our use of AI in this paper, as our goal
is to improve AI systems that have previously and currently been used. Consequently, no human
jobs would be replaced in the implementation of our model as it would replace existing AI roles.
Additionally, the generalizability and stability of our model combined with a specialized model
would create a system that accurately and reliably forecasts game outcome. Lastly, the
implementation of the LSTM architecture and a large sequence size prove to understand the patterns
across seasons and not get halted by the concept drift gap that many sports models struggle with.
        Thus, this article makes the following contributions:
            • Introduces a new NBA basketball dataset that can be used to predict match outcomes.
            • Implements a new LSTM architecture that can be applied to predict match outcomes
                with high accuracy.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: section 2 describes the related works, section 3 explains
the dataset and the methodology, section 4 presents the experimental evaluation and section 5
contains the conclusions.

2. Related Work
The use of traditional ML algorithms, statistical models, and DL architectures in research papers has
been around for quite some time and has increased in popularity as of late. This section will explore
how these related works support the ideas in this paper and exactly how we will fill the gaps they
leave.
        Recent works assert the idea that temporal dependencies improve accuracy in sports game
outcome prediction. The work in [6] uses a hybrid neural network, named MambaNet, to predict the
NBA playoffs. In their paper, they explain how the temporal dependencies in NBA game data are
predictive and improves accuracy beyond what traditional ML can achieve without effectively
capturing those relationships. Additionally, it reinforces the idea of DL models like RNN’s are
increasingly becoming an established tool for sports game outcome prediction. However, MambaNet
was only trained on and used for playoff games, effectively ignoring any long-term patterns. Another
current paper asserts similar ideas where the high dimensionality of sports statistics like time
dependencies can be used to achieve higher prediction accuracies with DL architectures than those
of traditional ML models [7].


2
         Another compartment of sports game outcome prediction is the problem of recency. Concept
drift, known as when the patterns learned in past data are no longer effectively useful to the present
data. This is a largely known problem in sports prediction due to changes in rules, team rosters,
injuries, and many other factors. Several methods have been tested to combat this, including time-
decay weighting which was used in a foundational paper widely cited to maintain the idea of recent
games mattering more than old one [8]. A more recent paper shows how predictive accuracy worsens
with excessive number of past seasons [9]. These papers and others in the field establish a well-
known issue with time-series prediction, especially with sports.
         Fallback/Generalizable models in sports prediction is not very common. This may be due to
problems of recency and the constantly evolving nature of the NBA in its rules and playstyle as seen
with the three-point revolution with Steph Curry. However, their implications could be very
beneficial towards creating sustainable and real-world applicable tools for not only basketball but all
sports. One such organization, FiveThirtyEight, has created a hybrid system using ELO and
RAPTOR to accurately predict NBA game outcomes [10]. How they make NBA prediction is much
more than just ELO and RAPTOR, as it has been consistently improved over the years since its first
major version was released in 2015. Although, their system is large and complex, utilizing multiple
rating systems to come to the final prediction. The model introduced in this paper is similar in spirt
to what FiveThirtyEight has accomplished with their system but simpler.
         We have established that time dependencies are known to be very useful in predictions for
NBA games and concept drift being a major issue to address in sports game outcome prediction. Our
model aims to utilize the knowledge known in the field of sports game outcome prediction and
address an issue that has plagued academics. It’s nature to work as a fallback model works to aid
existing architectures and tools in place with a much simpler and more efficient design.


3. Methodology
This section delivers the dataset in 3.1 and the proposed LSTM methodology in section 3.2

3.1 The dataset

Each NBA game consists of 2 teams, Home and Away. To represent both teams, each feature shown
in Table 1 is duplicated in the training dataset, i.e. HOME_PTS & AWAY_PTS. This is to ensure
the model’s understanding of effects such as home-court advantage, which would be ignored if
features were only provided for 1 team or aggregated across both. Additionally, each feature value
corresponds with the statistic recorded for the given team’s most recent game. This is to establish
comprehension of temporal dependencies which are commonly useful for NBA game outcome
prediction. This is evidenced by recent work utilizing sequential game data for RNNs, including
LSTMs, to achieve higher accuracies than traditional ML models [7]. The dataset covers all NBA
regular season games from 2008-2024 seasons and is fetched from nba.com/stats. While this dataset
uses a diverse number of features that can show many facets of how basketball is played, it does not
account for roster, mid-season trades, or free-agency signings. These unaccounted aspects of the
game, if included, could have improved accuracy. The dataset can be found at
https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/charlesrios/nba-advanced-metrics-2004-2024


                  Feature Name                                        Description


3
         WINS                            Total Wins
        LOSSES                          Total Losses
         FGM                      Total Field Goals Made
          FGA                  Total Field Goals Attempted
         FG3A                Total 3pt Field Goals Attempted
         FG3M                   Total 3pt Field Goals Made
          FTA                     Free Throws Attempted
          FTM                        Free Throws Made
         OREB                       Offensive Rebounds
         DREB                       Defensive Rebounds
          AST                               Assists
          STL                                Steals
          BLK                               Blocks
           TO                             Turnovers
           PF                          Personal Fouls
          PTS                           Points Scored
      PLUS_MINUS        Differential between Points Scored – Points
                                           Allowed
      OFF_RATING        Amount of Points a team produces per 100
                                         possessions
      DEF_RATING         Amount of Points a team allows per 100
                                         possessions
       AST_PCT         Percentage of a team’s FGM where a player
                               assisted on while on the court
       AST_TOV        The ratio of the amount of assists a team made
                             vs the number of turnovers made
      AST_RATIO        Percentage of Team’s possessions that end in
                                           an assist
       OREB_PCT        Percentage of available offensive rebounds a
                                        team obtains
       DREB_PCT        Percentage of available defensive rebounds a
                                        team obtains
      TM_TOV_PCT          Percentage of possessions that end in a
                                           turnover
       EFG_PCT          Field Goal Percentage that accounts for 3pt
                            shots are worth more than 2pt shots
        TS_PCT         Field Goal Percentage that incorporates free
                       throws to measure overall scoring efficiency
         PACE               Number of Possessions per 48 mins
         POSS                            Possessions
          PIE                     Player Impact Estimate
     PCT_PTS_PAINT     Percentage of total points that were scored in
                                           the paint
      PCT_PTS_FB      Percentage of total points that were scored on a
                                          fastbreak
    PCT_PTS_OFF_TOV   Percentage of total points that were scored off
                                          a turnover


4
                  PCT_PTS_3PT                          Percentage of total points that were scored as 3
                                                                           pointers
                              Table 1. Description of Features Used in Dataset



3.2 Proposed LSTM
We implemented an LSTM model, which is a type of Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) that is
designed to handle sequential data effectively. They contain memory cells which employ a gating
system that decides what information to store, forget, or send out. This allows for the LSTM to keep
relevant information while discarding that which is no longer necessary. This specific structure is
effective when it comes to time-series prediction like sport game outcome prediction. One of the
things that is unique about LSTMs is their ability to view large amounts of data in one prediction,
known as the sequence length. For example, it can view the past n games of an NBA season at a
given time. For this model, the problem was structured as a sequence-to-one task where it views the
past 9,840 NBA Games to make a prediction on the current game. Therefore, the sequence length is
equivalent to 8 NBA regular seasons. TensorFlow and Keras were used for the implementation of
the LSTM. The exact structure of the LSTM is documented in Table 2.

          Type of Layer       Units / Neurons / Rate           Activation                Return
                                                                                        Sequences
              LSTM                        200                     N/A                    True
              LSTM                        100                     N/A                    True
              LSTM                         50                     N/A                    False
              Dense                        32                    ReLu                    N/A
             Dropout                      0.3                     N/A                    N/A
              Dense                         1                   Sigmoid                  N/A
                                        Table 2. LSTM Parameters


The proposed LSTM model is defined using the following notations where:
   • 𝑥! : input vector at time t (features of the current NBA game)
   • ℎ!"# : previous hidden state (short-term memory from the previous game)
   • 𝑐!"# : previous cell state (long-term memory carried across the entire sequence)
   • ℎ! : new hidden state at time t (output/short-term memory for current step)
   • 𝑐! : new cell state at time t (updated long-term memory)
   • 𝑓! : forget gate (decides what to discard from 𝑐!"# )
   • 𝑖! : input gate (decides what new information to add)
   • 𝑜! : output gate (decides what to output as ℎ! )
   • 𝑐̃! or 𝑐̂! : candidate cell state (the raw new information created at time t)
                                                      #
   • 𝜎 : sigmoid activation function → 𝜎(𝑧) = #$% !"
                                                                            % " "% !"
    •   tanh : hyperbolic tangent activation function → tanh (𝑧) = % " $% !"
    •   𝑊& , 𝑊' , 𝑊( , 𝑊) : trainable weight matrices for the four gates
    •   𝑏& , 𝑏' , 𝑏( , 𝑏) : trainable bias vectors for the four gates
    •   [ ℎ!"# , 𝑥! ] : concatenation of previous hidden state and current input
    •   ⋅ (dot): matrix-vector multiplication


5
    •   ⊙: elementwise (Hadamard) multiplication

Then the LSTM computes six vectors using four gates as follows:

Forget gate which decides what to forget from the old cell state as shown in equation 1 below:

                                   𝑓# = 𝜎$𝑊$ ⋅ [ℎ#%& , 𝑥# ] + 𝑏$ .                               (1)

Input gate which decides what new information to store as shown in equation 2 below:

                                   𝑖# = 𝜎(𝑊' ⋅ [ℎ#%& , 𝑥# ] + 𝑏' )                               (2)

Candidate cell update which creates new candidate values as shown in equation 3 below:
                                 𝑐̃# = tanh (𝑊( ⋅ [ℎ#%& , 𝑥# ] + 𝑏( )                            (3)

Output gate which decides what parts of the cell state to output as shown in equation 4 below:

                                  𝑜# = 𝜎(𝑊) ⋅ [ℎ#%& , 𝑥# ] + 𝑏) )                                (4)

New cell state (long-term memory) as shown in equation 5 below:

                                    𝑐# = 𝑓# ⊙ 𝑐#%& + 𝑖# ⊙ 𝑐̃#                                    (5)

New hidden state (short-term memory / output of the cell) as shown in equation 6 below:

                                       ℎ# = 𝑜# ⊙ tanh (𝑐# )                                      (6)



Subsequently, the LSTM is adjusted to the dataset as follows:

Reads the input shape: (batch_size, 9840, features) → 9840 timesteps (past games), each with a
number of statistical features and then the following steps take place:
                                                                            (#)
First LSTM layer (200 units, return_sequences=True) For t = 1 to 9840: ℎ! ∈ ℝ,-- is computed
using the equations above Output shape: (batch, 9840, 200)
Second LSTM layer (100 units, return_sequences=True) Takes the sequence of 200-dim hidden
states from layer 1 as input Output shape: (batch, 9840, 100)
Third LSTM layer (50 units, return_sequences=False) Processes the full sequence but returns
                             (1)
only the final hidden state ℎ./0- ∈ ℝ2- Output shape: (batch, 50)
                                     (1)
Dense layer (32, ReLU) 𝑧 = 𝑊 ⋅ ℎ./0- + 𝑏𝑎 = ReLU(𝑧) = max (0, 𝑧) Output: 32-dimensional
vector
Dropout layer (0.3) Randomly sets 30% of the 32 values to zero during training (prevents
overfitting)
                                                                                #
Dense layer (1, Sigmoid) The final prediction layer 𝑦@ = 𝜎(𝑤 ⋅ 𝑎 + 𝑏) = #$% !(+⋅-./) Output: a
single probability between 0 and 1 (e.g., probability that the home team wins)




6
Finally, it is worth mentioning that Deep neural networks such as LSTMs are known for the difficulty
of explaining its performance. This leads to them being referred to as black boxes. A recent study
shows how to combat this issue and provide more explainable AI into a field like sports [15]. The
process used is known as distillation where a simpler model is trained to predict the ore complex
model outputs, allowing for performance near the same level with explainable features to analyze.
We believe that this process can be used to further increase the explainability in our model for those
who want to adopt this architecture but value explainability over performance.

4. Experimental evaluation
The experimental evaluation took place on a computer using the Linux operating system and the
Python programming language along with Tensorflow, Keras and Scikit learn libraries. This section
contains the processing of the dataset in sub-section 4.1, the evaluation metrics in sub-section 4.2,
the results in sub-section 4.3 and the discussion of the results in sub-section 4.4.

4.1 Dataset processing
To perform the experiments, we used the dataset described in section 3 as follows:

    •   The dataset includes NBA games from 2004-05 season to 2024-25 season.
    •   Each training sample requires a fixed sequence of 9,840 games. This sequence is useful to
        the LSTM for its ability to "remember" past outcomes.
    •   This number (9,840) comes from 1230 games (Total games scheduled to play in 1 NBA
        regular season) × 8 seasons.
    •   To build one training sample, the model takes the first 9,840 rows in the dataset (which
        correspond to the 2004–05 through 2011–12 seasons).
    •   After collecting those 9,840 games, the model predicts the outcome of the next game (the
        first game of the 2012–13 season).
    •   For the following samples, the window shifts forward by one game each time, always keeping
        exactly 9,840 games in the sequence.
    •   Although the dataset spans the 2004-05 to 2024-25 seasons, the model does not produce
        predictions until the 2012–13 season because everything before that season is used only to
        fill the initial sequence window.

4.2 Evaluation metrics
For the evaluation of the proposed methodology, we have used the Accuracy, Precision and AUC
ROC metrics. Accuracy measures the proportion of total predictions that the model classifies
correctly as shown in equation 7 where TP, TN, FP, and FN represent true positives, true negatives,
false positives, and false negatives. Precision measures how many of the positive predictions made
by the model are correct as shown in equation 8 where TP stands for True Positives and FP for False
Positives, making it especially important when false positives carry a high cost. The Area Under the
Receiver Operating Characteristic Curve (AUC-ROC) is defined in equation 9 and it evaluates how
well the model separates positive and negative classes across all classification thresholds; it is
computed as the integral of the true positive rate with respect to the false positive rate, and represents
the probability that the model ranks a randomly chosen positive instance higher than a randomly
chosen negative one and in the equation TPR is the proportion of actual positives correctly identified
(TPR = TP/(TP+FN)), FPR is the proportion of actual negatives incorrectly identified as positive
(FPR = FP/(FP+TN)), and d(FPR) represents an infinitesimally small change in the false positive
rate used when integrating the ROC curve.

7
                                                  𝑇𝑃 + 𝑇𝑁
                                𝐴𝑐𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑦 =                                                       (7)
                                             𝑇𝑃 + 𝑇𝑁 + 𝐹𝑃 + 𝐹𝑁


                                                     𝑇𝑃                                          (8)
                                     𝑃𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛 =
                                                   𝑇𝑃 + 𝐹𝑃


                                              &
                                                                                                 (9)
                                𝐴𝑈𝐶 𝑅𝑂𝐶 = O 𝑇𝑃𝑅(𝐹𝑃𝑅) 𝑑(𝐹𝑃𝑅)
                                             1


4.3 Experimental results
For comparison purposes we have used the Logistic Regression, Random Forest, Multi-Layer
Perceptron and CNN classifiers as explained below. Moreover, we compared the proposed
methodology against three recent works as shown later.

Logistic Regression
We started with Logistic Regression (LR) to create a baseline to test against the more complex
models as it is commonly treated as a starting point for classification problems, especially NBA
game outcome prediction [11-13]. LR estimates the probability of a binary outcome, in this case
(Home Win/Away Win), and learns by using a linear combination of features with a sigmoid
activation function. Scikit-Learn was used for the implementation of the LR model and L2
regularization was applied to prevent overfitting and increase generalization across the dataset.
Moreover, the L2 regularization penalty parameter was set at 1.0.

Random Forest Classifier
We then attempted to use a Random Forest Classifier (RF) to see how accuracies would compare.
RFC is a ML algorithm that builds multiple decision trees during training and merging their
predictions. Each one of the trees is trained on a random subset from the training data. This is done
by a statistical technique known as bootstrapping where samples from the dataset are repeatedly
chosen at random from a subset of samples. Once a sample is chosen, it is put back into the subset
of samples before the next pick. In the context of Random Forests, this guarantees that each tree in
the forest views a different dataset, which in turn aids in preventing overfitting and increasing
diversity. At each split in the tree, only a random subset of features is considered. Scikit-Learn was
used in the implementation of the Random Forest Classifier. The randomness of RFCs is what leads
them to be less prone to overfitting and more generalizable. Tree-based models like RFCs have been
becoming a very reasonable choice in architecture for sports game prediction. Compared to ANNs,
they need much less data, easier to implement, and less prone to overfitting. They are very useful
when data is limited, which can be the case in NBA game outcome forecasting, and perform well
without careful tuning [14].

Multi-Layer Perceptron
Now, we move onto DL architectures. The MLP was used to increase accuracy with its increased
complexity compared to Random Forests and Logistic Regression. An MLP is a form of an artificial
neural network (ANN) that contains 1 input layer, 1 or more hidden layers, and 1 output layer. It
takes in inputs from the input layer and passes the inputs through the hidden layers that uses neurons


8
to transform them using biases, weights and activation functions. Finally, the output layer gives the
prediction. Within each neuron, a weighted sum of the inputs is computed, and a bias is added. The
sum of inputs is then passed through a nonlinear activation function. The output of one layer becomes
the input of the next. Through this process, the MLP adapts and learns to link inputs to outputs by
minimizing a given loss function. TensorFlow and Keras were used for the implementation of the
MLP. For the exact architecture of MLP refer to Table 3. The loss function is binary cross entropy
as this is standard for a binary classification problem and the optimizer used is Adam.

       Type of Layer                        Neurons / Rate                      Activation
           Dense                                  128                               Relu
     BatchNormalization                           N/A                               N/A
          Dropout                                 0.3                               N/A
           Dense                                   64                               Relu
          Dropout                                 0.3                               N/A
           Dense                                   32                               Relu
           Dense                                    1                             Sigmoid
                                Table 3. Multi-Layer Perceptron Parameters


Convolutional Neural Network
Entering the realm of more complex architectures, we tested against a CNN. CNNs have
convolutional layers that use filters that slide over the input to identify patterns. Pooling layers can
be added to reduce the size and complexity by summarizing nearby values to prevent overfitting.
The last connected layers combine the extracted features to make the final prediction. We used L2
regularization and 3 Pooling layers to prevent overfitting and increase generalization. TensorFlow
and Keras were used for the implementation of the CNN. Binary cross entropy was used as the loss
function and Adam is the optimizer. The exact structure of the CNN is documented in Table 4.

 Type of Layer      Neurons        Kernel       Pool Size Activation          Kernel Regularizer
                                    Size                                            Value
  Conv2D                32          (1,2)          N/A           ReLu                 0.001
MaxPooling2D           N/A          N/A            (1,2)          N/A                  N/A
  Conv2D                64          (1,2)          N/A           ReLu                 0.001
MaxPooling2D           N/A          N/A            (1,2)          N/A                  N/A
  Conv2D               128          (1,2)          N/A           ReLu                 0.001
MaxPooling2D           N/A          N/A            (1,2)          N/A                  N/A
   Flatten             N/A          N/A            N/A            N/A                  N/A
   Dense               128          N/A            N/A           ReLu                 0.001
   Dense                 1          N/A            N/A          Sigmoid                N/A
                                        Table 4. CNN Parameters


All models were evaluated on Accuracy, Precision and AUC-ROC effectively as shown by the
results in figures 1, 2 and 3 respectively. AUC-ROC was specifically utilized to assess each model’s
ability to distinguish between classes. This metric is important for any classification model, but
especially for sports game outcome prediction as illustrated by Vegas betting lines which calculate


9
win probabilities for sports games. The forecasts given by these betting lines are roughly 55%
accurate which is significantly lower than out model’s accuracy of 72.35% [16].
         Reliability on the model’s positive classification (Home Win) is analyzed by the precision
metric. False positives can be costly with NBA game outcome prediction for NBA teams where 1 or
2 false positives can derail a strategy towards making the NBA playoffs. Additionally, sportsbooks
using these types of models need to be able to rely on positive classifications to create accurate odds
or their revenue will see a downtrend.
         The Logistic Regression model attained a respectable accuracy of 70.12%. This creates a
simple baseline to compare to other models. AUC-ROC and Precision also reached moderate levels
with 69.85% and 70.66% respectively. Although, since logistic regression underperformed
compared to the DL models, with exception to the CNN, this shows that the linear relationships are
inadequate alone for fully capturing the patterns in the data.
         The Random Forest performed similarly to the baseline with a slightly increased accuracy
and AUC-ROC score but decreased precision. This means that while the random forest can capture
patterns in the data slightly better than the baseline, but it needed to sacrifice reliability on its
predictions to accomplish that. This may reflect a precision-recall trade off, which might be due to
the model being more sensitive towards the positive class (Home Win). However, the random forest
did provide more information on the data then simply accuracy. This model contains feature
importances after being fitted on the data which shows how much each individual feature contributed
to the final prediction. The Top 3 metrics that are most predictive for NBA game outcome prediction
are LOSSES, WINS, and PIE.
         While being known for their complexity and strength in identifying patterns, MLPs are the
simplest form of DL models. Here, there is a larger jump in accuracy seen with the Logistic
Regression Vs. Random Forest as well as a much larger increase in AUC and Precision. This
demonstrates how the non-linear patterns in the data are more significant for this task than the linear
patterns captured with the baseline. Also, the complexity of the model is aiding with capturing the
complex patterns of the data.
         CNNs are commonly used for visual or graph-like data, but they can be leveraged to work
with tabular data. They have seen some use in NBA game outcome prediction due to their complexity
and ability to capture spatial patterns effectively. There is a decrease in both accuracy and precision
but an increase in AUC-ROC as seen in the results chart, indicating that the CNN is better at creating
win probabilities. The model can understand probability distributions more proficiently but
underperforms when it comes to actual predictions and classifying positives. To combat this,
threshold optimization and probability calibration might have a positive effect on its overall
performance and while CNN’s can be used for tabular data, this is not their area of expertise and are
commonly leveraged with other models (i.e. hybrid architectures). Shot charts are one example of
where CNNs can shine in sports game prediction especially when used as part of an intelligent system
recognizing both spatial and temporal patterns [2]. Those patterns are well known to be predictive
and present in sports game data. Finally, the LSTM model performed exceptionally well compared
to the baselines. It achieved the highest scores across all metrics of any of the models. The LSTM’s
performance suggests that the temporal dependencies captured are the most effective for this task
and contribute to predictive accuracy.




10
     Figure 1. Accuracy results Comparisons




     Figure 2. Precision results Comparisons




11
                                 Figure 3. AUC-ROC results Comparisons


In addition to the previous comparisons, we compared our proposed methodology against three state-
of-the-art methods as shown below and in figure 4.
     • Predicting Results for Professional Basketball Using NBA API Data by Perricone, J.,
         Shaw, S., & Swiechowicz, J. (2016) Ref [12].
     • Predicting Season Outcomes for the NBA by Teno, G. D. S., Wang, C., Carlsson, N. &
         Lambrix, P. (2022) Ref [17].
     • Enhancing Basketball Game Outcome Prediction through Fused Graph Convolutional
         Networks and Random Forest Algorithm by Zhao, K., Du, C. & Tan, G. (2023) Ref [18].




                  Figure 4. Comparison with previous methods based on the accuracy metric




12
4.4 Discussion
The LSTM model performed the best out of the 5 models that were tested. This suggests that the
temporal dependencies in the data were much better at the task then the linear relationships learned
through logistic regression and the non-linear relationships learned with the MLP and CNN. While
RFCs can handle sequential data and temporal dependencies, they are not as optimized and tailored
for that data as the LSTMs are. The performance of each model was as expected except for the CNN.
We had expected the CNN to achieve a higher accuracy score than the MLP and especially the
Logistic Regression and Random Forest models, however, its only improved metric was AUC-ROC.
Due to the structure and goals of CNN architecture, tabular data is not usually where the neural
networks shine. We believe this is why it did not perform better. Tabular data can be transformed in
a way such that CNNs can view them in channels and treat them as images, however, the results of
this study imply that time sequences are more useful in predicting NBA games than data transformed
for CNNs. The domain that CNNs excel in is image detection and spatial pattern recognition which
utilizes image or graph data. Possibly, if image data, such as shot chart plotting where each team’s
made and missed shots on the court, were used, then the CNN might have performed reasonably
better.
         Another interesting observation of the results is in the feature importances of the Random
Forest model. The NBA has gone through a massive change over the years, and this is largely due
to the three-point revolution and the recognition of the strength of 3 pointers. This notion is
statistically supported by a study showing the long-term trends of 3pt and 2pt shots over 40
consecutive seasons of the NBA [19]. Teams have shifted coaching styles to include more 3pt shots
and acquire players who are skilled in making 3 pointers as a winning strategy, i.e. Golden State
Warriors in the late 2010s and the rise of the shooter player archetype. For this reason, we had
expected FG3A and FG3M would be some of the highest ranked features by importance. Yet, those
features ranked near the bottom while other features like WINS, LOSSES, PIE, and even
PCT_PTS_PTS_PAINT were much more important towards the final prediction. While Zajac et al,
demonstrated how the 3pt shot has been trending upwards, our study shows that the 3pt shot does
not contribute heavily to overall interseason game outcome, contradicting our initial hypothesis. This
may be occurring due to the model’s generality across seasons not being bias towards large changes,
like ignoring other statistics that are still predictive. The LSTM outperforming the other models that
do not have architecture specifically for dealing with time-series data shows how important the time
dependencies are in NBA game outcome prediction, which supports the notion of time dependencies’
strong predictive power in sports data [7].
         Our model also outperformed several papers in recent years (Figure 2), showcasing the gap
in the space that this new implementation of LSTM models could fill. However, we propose our
model as being used as a generalizable fallback, that aims to support single-season models in
reliability and precision. We believe that the large sequence history allows for the LSTM to learn
generalizable patterns across teams and seasons. With our model as a fallback, sports prediction
systems would not only be more robust but could also increase accuracy when stacking with other
models that are trained specifically for the current season. In theory, this could help academics and
professional in being more efficient with increasingly large amounts of data. Being able to make use
of data that was previously believed to be unusable would not only increase efficiency in the field
but possibly open the door for new ideas to flourish.
         There are still limitations to consider when applying this structure that existing frameworks
may not have to. A large amount of data is needed to put this into effect. In terms of NBA regular
seasons, the sequence size alone is 8 and to adequately train and test a DL architecture like LSTM
requires large train and test sets. This is especially true for the ability to generalize across seasons,


13
meaning the train and test sets must span across multiple seasons. Therefore, many seasons of NBA
game data is needed to incorporate this setup. Another caveat is that our study only shows the results
of predicting NBA regular season games, which does not include the post or pre-season. Therefore,
ability in predicting NBA playoffs or summer league games is unknown. Our hypothesis would be
that there is not enough data in the post or pre-season to utilize this structure as they contain
significantly less games.


5. Conclusion
In conclusion, this study has showcased how models can generalize across multiple seasons for
sports game outcome prediction and be majorly beneficial to professionals in the field. With the
LSTM’s tailored architecture for dealing with time series data, its performance demonstrates that it
can handle large amounts of data and make accurate predictions. This may lead to its consideration
for creating generalizable fallback models for NBA Game Outcome prediction. The precision and
AUC-ROC score provide evidence to how well the model can distinguish between classes and how
reliable its predictions are. This is essential for multiple sectors of the sports industries such as
coaches, trainers, players, analysts, sportsbooks, and bettors.
        Before getting into the implications of this proposal, let’s explore where it falls short. First,
this proposed model is limited by its large sequence size. Using such a large lookback is what allows
the model to generalize across multiple seasons and identify key patterns in game outcome that affect
all teams. Handling such a large amount of data can be tasking due to the need of sufficient
processing power and high storage requirements. This also contributes to the difficulty of
transitioning this framework towards real-time predictions. If one was to use this architecture for
real-time live predictions, they would need to understand that the model might not be able to keep
up with real-time speed while processing a large sequence size. Second, its use in non-regular season
games, such as post-season or pre-season games, is expected to be inadequate. The NBA playoffs
and NBA Summer League are fundamentally different than the regular season. For example, teams
during playoffs utilize their best players and strategies to win the championship, therefore, the
intensity and importance of the game is much higher, leading to differences in playstyle and
increased risk of injury which are not present in the regular season. Additionally, there are drastically
less post-season and pre-season game than the regular season which creates much less data to train
on, increasing the risk of overfitting with a DL model like a LSTM used in this paper. Finally, this
model would be much more effectively utilized as a fallback model as suggested in this proposal.
Providing an educated prior to a more specialized model, our model will use generalized patterns
across seasons that the specialized model cannot consider. The specialized model fine-tuning that
prior with current season patterns will result in more accurate, reliable, and stable predictions. The
limitation stems from handling these models which in turn uses more resources.
        Let’s dive deeper into the contributions that this type of model can have for the industry.
Coaches would be able to make more informed decisions [20-22]. In a situation where a given team
was predicted to lose, coaches could rest star players to prevent over-exhaustion and injuries, test
new team-strategies in a real-game setting, and evaluate bench player performance to identify ones
with potential for stardom. Players would benefit from increased rest days and less risk of injuries.
In recent years, the NBA and its player-base have had issues with load management, where a healthy
player is held from playing in a game for increased resting and decrease in long-term injury risk. To
combat this, in 2023, the NBA implemented a new Player Resting Policy (PRP) which made it more
difficult for teams to rest star players [23]. Effectively, decreasing the number of rest opportunities
that are available. This model allows coaches to better utilize the limited rest days they have for their
star players.

14
         Additionally, the contributions span towards the sports betting sector and aids both
sportsbooks and individual bettors in deciding how to act [24-26]. For sportsbooks, the use of AI in
calculating odds is already in place. However, generalizable multi-season fallback models could be
the next step in producing more reliable information for calculating odds, especially when ensembled
or stacked with a season or team-specific model. This would lead to better calibrated odds and
increased profits for the sportsbook. For individual bettors, use of this model allows for consideration
of statistics and features that they cannot without arduous and time-consuming analysis. Which will
in turn, provide for better informed decision-making and possibly new strategies for increasing their
return on investment.
         This paper also confirms the notion of temporal dependencies being very useful in sports
game outcome prediction. In the future, to improve the model further, we would include team rosters,
game lineups, injuries, trades, and even off-season moves made by teams. There are many facets of
the NBA and sports in general that come from off the court which could have increased accuracy in
this case. Nonetheless, this idea is not limited to only the NBA. Its design could potentially be used
in other sports such as baseball, football, and many others. This study highlights not only the
potential of a future in sports with AI but can create new and interesting ways to watch the sports
that give people around the world such enjoyment.

Declarations

Data availability statement We have made the dataset publicly                            available    at
https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/charlesrios/nba-advanced-metrics-2004-2024

Competing interests The authors declare that there are no competing interests.

Funding The authors did not receive any funding.

Acknowledgements
For the purpose of open access, the authors have applied a Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY)
licence to any Author Accepted Manuscript version arising from this submission

References
1. Mateus, N. et al. Empowering the Sports Scientist with Artificial Intelligence in Training,
   Performance, and Health Management. Sensors 25, 139 (2024).
2. Pietraszewski, P. et al. The Role of Artificial Intelligence in Sports Analytics: A Systematic
   Review and Meta-Analysis of Performance Trends. Appl. Sci. 15, 7254 (2025).
3. Xu, T. & Baghaei, S. Reshaping the future of sports with artificial intelligence: Challenges and
   opportunities in performance enhancement, fan engagement, and strategic decision-making. Eng.
   Appl. Artif. Intell. 142, 109912 (2025).
4. Claudino, J. G. et al. Current Approaches to the Use of Artificial Intelligence for Injury Risk
   Assessment and Performance Prediction in Team Sports: a Systematic Review. Sports Med. -
   Open 5, 28 (2019).
5. Naughton, M., Salmon, P. M., Compton, H. R. & McLean, S. Challenges and opportunities of
   artificial intelligence implementation within sports science and sports medicine teams. Front.
   Sports Act. Living 6, (2024).




15
6. Khanmohammadi, R., Saba-Sadiya, S., Esfandiarpour, S., Alhanai, T. & Ghassemi, M. M.
    MambaNet: A Hybrid Neural Network for Predicting the NBA Playoffs. SN Comput. Sci. 5, 628
    (2024).
7. Zhu, Z. High dimensional sports statistics and machine learning in NBA. Adv. Eng. Innov. 11,
    78–94 (2024).
8. Dixon, M. J. & Coles, S. G. Modelling association football scores and inefficiencies in the
    football betting market. J. R. Stat. Soc. Ser. C Appl. Stat. 46, 265–280 (1997).
9. Tsagris, M., Adam, C. & Pantatosakis, P. On predicting an NBA game outcome from half-time
    statistics. Discov. Artif. Intell. 4, 111 (2024).
10. Paine,       N.      How           Our       NBA       Predictions     Work.     FiveThirtyEight
    https://fivethirtyeight.com/methodology/how-our-nba-predictions-work/ (2018).
11. Chua, G. J. A thesis submitted in partial satisfaction of the requirements for the degree Master
    of Applied Statistics & Data Science.
12. Perricone, J., Shaw, S., & Swiechowicz, J. (2016). Predicting Results for Professional Basketball
    Using NBA API Data. Stanford University. Stanford CS229.
13. Yeung, M. Multiple Machine Learning Algorithms-based NBA Team Playoffs Prediction. ITM
    Web Conf. 70, 04024 (2025).
14. Bunker, R. P., & Thabtah, F. (2019). A machine learning framework for sport result
    prediction. Applied computing and informatics, 15(1), 27-33.
15. Sun, X., Davis, J., Schulte, O. & Liu, G. Cracking the Black Box: Distilling Deep Sports
    Analytics. in Proceedings of the 26th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge
    Discovery & Data Mining 3154–3162 (2020). doi:10.1145/3394486.3403367.
16. Rosenberg, L. & Willcox, G. Artificial Swarm Intelligence vs Vegas Betting Markets. in 2018
    11th International Conference on Developments in eSystems Engineering (DeSE) 36–39 (IEEE,
    Cambridge, UK, 2018). doi:10.1109/DeSE.2018.00014.
17. Teno, G. D. S., Wang, C., Carlsson, N. & Lambrix, P. Predicting Season Outcomes for the NBA.
    in Machine Learning and Data Mining for Sports Analytics (eds Brefeld, U., Davis, J., Van
    Haaren, J. & Zimmermann, A.) vol. 1571 129–142 (Springer International Publishing, Cham,
    2022).
18. Zhao, K., Du, C. & Tan, G. Enhancing Basketball Game Outcome Prediction through Fused
    Graph Convolutional Networks and Random Forest Algorithm. Entropy 25, 765 (2023).
19. Zając, T. et al. Long-Term Trends in Shooting Performance in the NBA: An Analysis of Two-
    and Three-Point Shooting across 40 Consecutive Seasons. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public. Health
    20, 1924 (2023).
20. Chmait, N. & Westerbeek, H. Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning in Sport Research:
    An Introduction for Non-data Scientists. Front. Sports Act. Living 3, 682287 (2021).
21. Millington, B., Naraine, M. L., Wanless, L., Safai, P. & Manley, A. Sport and the Promise of
    Artificial Intelligence: Human and Machine Futures. Sociol. Sport J. 42, 341–350 (2025).
22. Huang, Z., Wang, W., Jia, Z. & Wang, Z. Exploring the Integration of Artificial Intelligence in
    Sports Coaching: Enhancing Training Efficiency, Injury Prevention, and Overcoming
    Implementation Barriers. J. Comput. Commun. 12, 201–217 (2024).
23. Answering the big questions about the NBA’s new rules on resting stars. ESPN.com
    https://www.espn.com/nba/story/_/id/38386013/how-nba-new-rules-resting-stars-work (2023).
24. Constantinou, A., Fenton, N. & Neil, M. (PDF) pi-football: A Bayesian network model for
    forecasting Association Football match outcomes. Knowledge-Based Systems, 36, 322-339.
    ResearchGate                     https://doi.org/10.1016/j.knosys.2012.07.008             (2025)
    doi:10.1016/j.knosys.2012.07.008.


16
25. Yeung, C., Bunker, R. & Fujii, K. (PDF) A framework of interpretable match results prediction
    in     football     with    FIFA       ratings     and     team    formation.    ResearchGate
    https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0284318 doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0284318.
26. Walsh, C. & Joshi, A. Machine learning for sports betting: should model selection be based on
    accuracy or calibration? Preprint at https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2303.06021 (2024).




17
