                                                                  T IME -AWARE S YNTHETIC C ONTROL


                                                      Saeyoung Rho                           Cyrus Illick                       Samhitha Narasipura
                                                    Columbia University                   Columbia University                    Columbia University
                                                  rho@cs.columbia.edu                   cdi2105@columbia.edu                   sn3145@columbia.edu

                                                      Alberto Abadie                                Daniel Hsu                         Vishal Misra
                                             Massachusetts Institute of Technology              Columbia University                 Columbia University
arXiv:2601.03099v1 [cs.LG] 6 Jan 2026




                                                     abadie@mit.edu                          djhsu@cs.columbia.edu               misra@cs.columbia.edu




                                                                                              A BSTRACT
                                                 The synthetic control (SC) framework is widely used for observational causal inference with time-
                                                 series panel data. SC has been successful in diverse applications, but existing methods typically
                                                 treat the ordering of pre-intervention time indices interchangeable. This invariance means they may
                                                 not fully take advantage of temporal structure when strong trends are present. We propose Time-
                                                 Aware Synthetic Control (TASC), which employs a state-space model with a constant trend while
                                                 preserving a low-rank structure of the signal. TASC uses the Kalman filter and Rauch–Tung–Striebel
                                                 smoother: it first fits a generative time-series model with expectation–maximization and then performs
                                                 counterfactual inference. We evaluate TASC on both simulated and real-world datasets, including
                                                 policy evaluation and sports prediction. Our results suggest that TASC offers advantages in settings
                                                 with strong temporal trends and high levels of observation noise.

                                        Keywords Causal Inference · Synthetic Control · Time Series Panel Data · State Space Model · Bayesian Learning


                                        1   Introduction

                                        Synthetic Control (SC) is a popular method in observational causal inference. Often described as a natural extension
                                        of the Difference-in-Differences (D-in-D, [1]), SC aims to evaluate the effects of an intervention more accurately by
                                        creating synthetic counterfactual data. The first application was measuring the economic impact of the 1960’s terrorist
                                        conflict in Basque Country, Spain (a target unit) by combining GDP data from other Spanish regions (donor units) prior
                                        to the conflict to construct a synthetic GDP data for Basque Country in the counterfactual world without the conflict [2].
                                        Unlike D-in-D, which compares the changes in outcomes over time between a treated group and a comparison group,
                                        SC builds a synthetic comparison unit as a weighted combination of donors. SC is becoming increasingly popular with
                                        an expanding range of applications, including economics [2, 3, 4], political sciences [5, 6], social sciences [7, 8], and
                                        healthcare [9, 8, 10].
                                        SC methods assume that time-series panel data arise from a latent variable model, without restricting a relationship
                                        among the time-varying latent factors. The linear factor model, widely adopted in SC literature [2, 3, 5], is one example.
                                        This model is both flexible and versatile; for example, it can be extended to incorporate autoregressive components.
                                        However, this same flexibility leads SC methods built on top of the model to produce identical estimations when the
                                        pre-intervention time indices are permuted. While such flexibility avoids imposing strong structural assumptions, it also
                                        prevents the model from capturing predictive signals when a learnable trend exists. A key insight is that time-series data
                                        often exhibit stable trends, which we explicitly incorporate into the model.
                                        Another key property of time-series panel dataset is that, as the data size increases, the resulting data matrix tends to be
                                        approximately low-rank. This phenomenon, well analyzed by [11], becomes more pronounced when temporal trends
                                        are stronger, limiting the movement of latent factors across time points. Building on this insight, numerous SC variants
                                        have been proposed to leverage the data’s low-rank structure. These methods typically rely on spectral analysis of
                                        the data matrix: for example, [12] employs principal component regression, while [13] frames SC as a nuclear-norm
Time-Aware Synthetic Control (Preprint)


minimization problem. However, these approaches are also time-agnostic because shuffling of time indices does not
affect the spectrum of a matrix.
Our contribution lies in embedding SC panel data within a state-space model to simultaneously harness both the
low-rank and time-series properties of the data. We provide 1) the TASC model, a state-space generative model for
panel dataset, 2) TASC algorithms to learn the TASC model. Our paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we
present necessary background knowledge in synthetic control methods and common modeling assumptions. In Section
3, we introduce the TASC model, a time-series generative model based on a state-space model. Section 4 outlines
expectation-maximization (EM) style TASC algorithms, based on Kalman filtering and Rauch–Tung–Striebel (RTS)
smoothing. In Sections 5 and 6, we apply TASC to simulated and real-world datasets and demonstrate when our
approach is favorable.


2         Related Work

2.1       Synthetic Control Methods

The time-series panel dataset for SC consists of the fol-
lowing components. Let Yi,t ∈ R be the observation
from i-th unit (row) at time t (column). The first row cor-
responds to the treated target unit with index 1, while the
n untreated donor units occupy rows i ∈ {2, . . . , n + 1}.
This setup yields a total of N = n + 1 rows. The un-
treated observation matrix Y is of size N × T , where
the target unit’s values after t > T0 is missing due to the
treatment happening after time T0 . Figure 1 illustrates the
general structure of an SC dataset, where the superscripts
− and + denote the pre- and post-intervention periods,
respectively.
Based on this data structure, we define SC family of
methods (Algorithm 1) as follows. SC first learns the
relationship between the target unit and donors using the        Figure 1: General data structure for synthetic control
pre-intervention data. For example, M can be a vertical
regression where the donor’s pre-intervention column
vectors Y2:n+1,t become input features for the label Y1,t , for all t ∈ [T0 ]. Then, SC uses this knowledge (f ) to project
the post-intervention donor data Y + and predict Ŷ1+ . Finally, the causal effect of the intervention on the target unit is
estimated as Y1+ − Ŷ1+ .


Algorithm 1: Synthetic Control Family of Methods
Data: Target unit’s pre-intervention data Y1− ∈ RT0 , Donor data Y = [Y − , Y + ] ∈ Rn×T
Result: Counterfactual prediction Ŷ0+ , SC weights f
1. Learn f = M(Y0− , Y − , Y + )                                            /* the use of Y + is optional */
              +
2. Project Ŷ1 = f (Y + )
3. Infer the estimated causal effect of the intervention for the target is Y1+ − Ŷ1+


M refers to the SC learning algorithm. Much of the SC    Pliterature     has adopted a least squares predictor over the convex
                                                             n
scan of Y − : f = arg minf ||Y1− − f ⊤ Y − ||2 where i=1 fi = 1, 0 ≤ f ≤ 1 ∀i ∈ [n]1 [2, 3, 5]. The convex scan
condition can be replaced by Lasso (||f ||1 ) or Ridge (||f ||22 ) regularization [14, 12]. Some approaches use PCA to keep
only the top few singular values in data prior to the optimization step [12, 15]. Other variations of synthetic control
algorithms focused on issues such as handling multiple treated units [16, 17], dealing with a large the number of donors
[4, 18], and correcting biases [19]. See [20] for a detailed survey of these techniques.

      1
    Multivariate time-series and other covariates can be used with relative importance weighting, but this paper focuses on univariate
time-series.


                                                                  2
Time-Aware Synthetic Control (Preprint)


2.2     Latent Variable Models for Synthetic Control

The first SC algorithm suggested by [2] assumes a linear factor model
                                            Yi,t = δt + θt Zi + λt µi + ϵi,t ,                                        (1)
where δt is a time trend, Zi ∈ Rp and µi ∈ Rq are vector of observed and unobserved predictors, with coefficients
θt and µi , and ϵi,t is the noise. This model implies that the signal component of the matrix has a rank no more than
p + q + 1. When this quantity is considerably smaller than the matrix’s full rank, the observation matrix becomes
approximately low rank. This is indeed a common case for a factor model, verified in many real-world data [21, 22, 23].
This has inspired a range of SC algorithms to utilize the approximately low-rank structure of data. Several SC algorithms
employ simplex constraints or regularizers to minimize the number of active donor units [2, 3, 14, 24]; [18] introduces
donor selection step to reduce the number of donors in the first place; [12, 15] uses principal component regression; and
[13] frames SC as a problem of nuclear norm minimization.
Another characteristic of the panel data used in SC is its time-series nature. Despite this, many SC algorithm variants
remain invariant to permutations of time indices in pre-intervention data. Although the permutation-invariant approach
provides robustness by accommodating a wide range of temporal trends, it discards ordering information, whereas
explicit modeling strategies can exploit additional structure when meaningful temporal patterns exist. To address this,
some researchers have introduced algorithms that assume temporal trend by utilizing state-space models. [25] designed
the state vector to include elements such as SC weights, local linear trends, and seasonality. [26, 27] further simplified
this structure and only take SC weights as a latent state. The central concept of these approaches is to allow SC weights
to change over time, defining the target unit’s time series as an observation (scalar) and the SC weights (potentially
alongside additional components) as latent states (at least n-dimensional vector, where n is the number of donors).
Therefore, these modeling approaches do not necessarily ensure that the observation matrix is approximately low-rank.
Furthermore, by not explicitly modeling the stochasticity of the donor pool, these models may not fully leverage the
information available in the donor pool.

3     State-Space Model for TASC
Let yt be the t-th column of the untreated outcomes Y . The TASC approach assumes the following state space model:
                                        xt = Axt−1 + qt−1 , qt−1 ∼ N (0, Q),                                          (2)
                                        yt = Hxt + rt , rt ∼ N (0, R),                                                (3)
where we assume the initial hidden state x0 ∼ N (m0 , P0 ). The hidden states xt is d-dimensional, whereas yt is a
N = n + 1 dimensional vector. To keep the low-rank structure, we require d ≪ min(n, T ).
The model parameters are θ = {A, H, Q, R, m0 , P0 }, where A ∈ Rd×d , H ∈ RN ×d , Q ∈ Rd×d , R ∈ RN ×N ,
m0 ∈ Rd , and P0 ∈ Rd×d . This is a classical linear Gaussian model, and we set all covariance matrices Q, R, and P0
be positive definite. If desired, we may constrain the noise covariance matrices Q and R to be diagonal with non-zero
diagonal entries to reduce the number of parameters.

3.1     More Advanced Models for TASC

We mainly focus on the formulation of the TASC model introduced above, however, our learning algorithms can be
easily modified to accommodate more advanced models. We show several representative examples.

3.1.1    Allowing time-invariant portion of latent states
Without loss of generality, we can add a constant state x∗ and let only x′t part to change over time.


                                        x′t = Ax′t−1 + qt−1 , qt−1 ∼ N (0, Q),                                        (4)
                                               ∗
                                        xt = x     + x′t                                                              (5)
                                        yt = Hxt + rt , rt ∼ N (0, R).                                                (6)

The additional model parameter x∗ ∈ Rd is required, and this model can be easily adopted with our algorithms with
minimal modifications.


                                                            3
Time-Aware Synthetic Control (Preprint)


3.1.2        Allowing seasonality
The current model in Equations (2) and (3) do not capture the seasonality. Fortunately, the TASC model can be easily
modified to accommodate the seasonality. Let 1 denote a column vector with all entries equal to 1. To incorporate
seasonality, we define st ∈ R as the seasonal effect at time t that is constant across units, and specify the model
parameters as θ = {A, H, Q, R, m0 , P0 , s1 , . . . , sT }.
                                                   xt = Axt−1 + qt−1 , qt−1 ∼ N (0, Q),                                  (7)
                                                   yt = Hxt + st 1 + rt , rt ∼ N (0, R).                                 (8)
With this formulation, st can either set by the user as a hyperparameter, or learned in the M-step of the EM algorithm.

3.1.3        Allowing multiple time series
When we have m time series observed at time t for unit i, we can stack them vertically to redefine yt . Let
 (1)           (m)
yt , . . . , y t   ∈ Rn be the m time series observed from n units at time t. Then, we treat as if we observe nm
                                        (1) ⊤             (m) ⊤ ⊤
units at time t and define yt = [yt             , . . . , yt     ] ∈ Rnm .
                                              xt = Axt−1 + qt−1 , qt−1 ∼ N (0, Q),                                       (9)
                                                    (1) 
                                                    yt
                                                    .. 
                                              yt =  .  = Hxt + rt , rt ∼ N (0, R).                                    (10)
                                                           (m)
                                                          yt

If desired, one can model the connection among the m time series from the same unit by designing another layer of
latent lookup table.

3.2        Comparison to Other Models

The classical SC [2] assumes a linear factor model with observed and unobserved factors as in Equation (1). This
can be reformulated as state-space models: all time-dependent variables define the latent state xt = (δt , θt , λt ) and
the mapping between the latent state and individual observations (i.e., i-th row of H) encodes hi = (1, Zi , µi ). With
this formulation, the hidden state dimension becomes d = 1 + p + q. However, linear factor models do not explicitly
assume a trend matrix A. This absence can be encoded either by allowing a time-varying trend At at each time point
or by setting A = 0 and modeling xt = qt , ; qt ∼ N (0, Qt ). The key distinction from TASC is that TASC enforces
a stable relationship among xt , whereas linear factor models do not. This suggests that while TASC can achieve
improved predictive performance under correct specification, it is also more susceptible to misspecification when
temporal dynamics are complex.
In Robust Synthetic Control (RSC, [12]), matrix entries are assumed to follow a latent variable model Yi,t = g(θi , ρt ) +
ϵi,t where θi and ρt are d dimensional2 latent vectors characterizing i-th unit and t-th time, and ϵi,t is observation noise.
This is a more generalized expression that can include the linear factor model in Equation (1). RSC’s learning algorithm
                                                                                                     Pmin(n,T )
can be interpreted as learning θi and ρt by treating g as a dot product and employing PCA: Y = l=1                sl ul vl⊤ =
Pd            ⊤
                  P min(n,T )        ⊤                                                                             1/2
   l=1 sl ul vl +   l=d+1     sl ul vl , where sl is singular values in decreasing order. By defining Ũ to have sl ul for
                                             1/2
l ≤ d as columns and Ṽ ⊤ to have sl vl for l ≤ d as rows, the rows of Ũ can be interpreted as θi and the columns of
Ṽ as ρt . Similarly, the TASC model suggests a decomposition Y = HX + E, where the columns of X are hidden
states xt and the columns of E are observation noise rt . Here, the rows of H are analogous to θi and the columns of
X are to ρt . Both Ũ Ṽ ⊤ and HX are exactly low-rank matrices, but they differ in how we separate the noise. The
difference comes from the learning objectives: RSC’s approach minimizes the size of the noise matrix (in terms of
spectral norm), whereas TASC focuses on making sure the time-features xt evolve gradually over time with a constant
trend A. As a result, the noise filtered by RSC algorithm becomes rank min(n, T ) − d, whereas E is almost surely full
rank (omnidirectional).

3.3        When TASC Model Is Advantageous

A distinctive feature of the TASC approach is its explicit modeling of the trend A. This design choice offers several
advantages, though it may introduce limitations in certain cases. First, incorporating A enhances the interpretability
      2
          Dimension of θi and ρt may vary.


                                                                        4
Time-Aware Synthetic Control (Preprint)



Algorithm 2: EMpre (Ypre ; N1 )
Data: Ypre where (i, j)-th element is yi,t ∀(i, t) ∈ [0 : n] × [1 : T0 ] (pre-intervention data from the target and
        donors)
Result: θ = {A, H, Q, R, m0 , P0 }
Initialize θ(0)
for i ← 1 to N1 do
     for k ← 1 to T0 do
         Update mk , Pk via Kalman filtering with θ(i−1)                        /* filtering pass of E-Step */
     end
     for k ← T0 − 1 to 0 do
         Update msk , Pks , Gk via RTS Smoothing with θ(i−1)                    /* smoothing pass of E-step */
     end
     Update θ(i) using M-step (Algorithm 7)
    with T = T0                                                                                        /* M-step */
end
return θ(N1 )


of the TASC model, as it captures the underlying trend in time-series data. Second, if trend A persists beyond the
intervention point, it provides TASC with strong predictive power, which is particularly advantageous over longer
time horizons. Third, by modeling A, TASC becomes sensitive to the time orders, rather than being agnostic to them.
Overall, TASC leverages temporal structure when a consistent trend exists but offers limited benefits when the trend is
weak or absent (e.g., A = 0).
Another benefit of TASC is the approximately low-rank structure, represented as Y = HX + E, where HX is
an exactly low-rank signal and E denotes noise. This low-rank property commonly appears in real-world datasets,
especially as the data size increases. In such cases, Principal Component Analysis (PCA) is a widely adopted technique
for extracting low-rank signals. It has been applied in various domains such as image processing, speech and audio
analysis, genomics, finance, and sensor data analysis, and has also been utilized in synthetic control methods by [12].
However, the performance of PCA deteriorates in the presence of substantial observational noise, as it assumes that the
learned principal components are noise-free in the selected directions. In contrast, TASC may offer improved robustness
in extracting signals under noisy conditions by assuming omnidirectional noise (i.e., the noise matrix is full rank).
We formalize this intuition using data processing inequality in Appendix A.


4     TASC Algorithms

In this section, we present TASC algorithms to learn TASC model parameters and make counterfactual predictions. First,
TASC uses pre-intervention data for parameter learning. We take an Expectation-Maximization (EM) approach, and the
update on M-step has a closed form solution for the exact maximizer of the expected complete-data log-likelihood. Then,
TASC performs counterfactual estimation by running additional Kalman Filtering and RTS Smoothing passes. Since
the post-intervention target data is deemed missing, we set the variance of observation noise for the target coordinate as
infinity so that the associated Kalman gain is set to zero.

4.1   Learning from Pre-Intervention Data

TASC learns the model parameters using the pre-intervention data, running EMpre as a subroutine. We can take the
classical EM approach for a linear gaussian state-space model, where the E-step comprises of a filtering pass (Kalman
filtering) and an smoothing pass (RTS smoothing). This gives us estimates msk and Pks to define a lower bound for
the posterior probability distribution. Algorithm 2 shows the main EM algorithm for parameter estimation based on
pre-intervention data.
For the M-step of Algorithm 2, we compute the maximizer of the expected complete log-likelihood (Q-function) by
using the fact that yt follows a multivariate Gaussian distribution. This approach has a closed-form solution, as shown
in Algorithm 7. If desired, this step can be replaced by a gradient ascent over the Q-function. This gradient-based
approach is preferable if additional modeling parameters are required and no close-form solutions can be computed. For
implementation, one can define a neural network with the same E-step as a forward pass, and perform gradient ascent.


                                                            5
Time-Aware Synthetic Control (Preprint)



Algorithm 3: TASC(Y ; N1 )
Data: yi,t ∀(i, t) ∈ [0 : n] × [1 : T0 ] and ∀(i, t) ∈ [1 : n] × [T0 + 1 : T ]
Result: θ̂ = {A, H, Q, R, m0 , P0 }, ŷ0,T0 +1 , . . . , ŷ0,T
Learn θN1 ← EMpre (Ypre ; N1 )
for k ← 1 to T0 do
    Update mk , Pk via Algorithm 4 with θN1                                 /* pre-intervention filtering */
end
for k ← T0 + 1 to T do
    Update mk , Pk via Algorithm 5 with θN1                         /* filtering with infinite variance */
end
for k ← T − 1 to 0 do
    Update msk , Pks via RTS Smoothing with θ(i−1)                                       /* smoothing pass */
end                  
                 h⊤1
Define H =
                 H2
for k ← T0 + 1 to T do
    ŷ0,t ← h⊤1 mt
                  s
                                                                               /* counterfactual inference */
end
return θN1 , ŷ0,T0 +1 , . . . , ŷ0,T



4.2   Counterfactual Inference with Post-Intervention Data

With the model parameters learned from EMpre (Algorithm 2), TASC uses another pass of Kalman filter and RTS
smoother to perform counterfactual inference. However, this is impossible without a special treatment since the first
element of yk (which belongs to the target unit) is missing. To handle
                                                                      this, we
                                                                              deemthat thetarget unit’s
                                                                                                      data   is missing,
                                                                       yt,1             rt,1            h⊤ 1
and separate the donor portion of the data and parameters: yt =               , rt =          ,H =            , and R =
                                                                       yt,2             rt,2            H2
           
   r1 0
              , where yt,2 , rt,2 ∈ Rn , H2 ∈ Rn×d , and R2 ∈ Rn×n . Then, we can rewrite the observation model for
   0 R2
the donors as yt,2 = H2 xt + rt,2 , where rt,2 ∼ N (0, R2 ). With this new model, the post-intervention observations
will not inform the target-related parameters: h1 and r1 . This is equivalent to setting r1 → ∞ in the original model.
With the infinite variance, post-intervention target time series do not affect the outcome of Kalman filtering, hence it
can be set to any value. The RTS Smoothing remains the same, as it does not use R or yk as an input. As a result,
this only changes the Kalman filter part in the post-intervention time steps from Algorithm 4 (Original Kalman filter)
to Algorithm 5 (Kalman filter with r1 → ∞). The complete description of TASC is provided in Algorithm 3. The
EMpre in the first line requires O(N1 T0 N 3 ) time, where the N 3 and d3 terms arise from matrix inversion using the
naive algorithm. The full TASC procedure incurs an additional O(T N 3 ), but assuming T ≪ N1 T0 , the overall time
complexity is dominated by the EMpre part.


5     Empirical Evaluation on Simulated Data

In this section, we demonstrate our method TASC on simulated data and compare against three benchmark algo-
rithms: Synthetic Control (SC) with simplex constraint [2], Robust Synthetic Control (RSC) with hard singular-value
thresholding [12], and Causal Impact Model (CIM) with bayesian modeling approach [25].

5.1   Effect of Permuting Time Indices

We tested the effect of permuting time indices on TASC performance. From a randomly generated dataset, we shuffle
the pre-intervention and post-intervention indices separately to ensure no mixing between the two segments. Figure 2
shows the post-intervention RMSE when the time indices are kept in their original order (left) and when the indices are
permuted (right). TASC performance deteriorates when the time indices are permuted: the mean increases by 48.5%
and the standard deviation increases by 25.7%. In contrast, SC and RSC predictions remain unchanged by design, even
when the time indices are permuted.


                                                            6
Time-Aware Synthetic Control (Preprint)




Figure 2: Post-intervention RMSE of TASC when the time indices are kept in their original order (left) and when the
indices are permuted (right)


5.2   Ablation Study on the Covariance Matrices

We compare the performance of TASC against three benchmarks under different settings for generating the hidden
state perturbation covariance Q and the observation noise covariance R. For both Q and R, we test a small covariance
matrix (generated with a = 0.01, b = 0.1) and a large covariance matrix (a = 0.1, b = 1). To illustrate how these
settings affect the generated time series, the average absolute value of the observation noise is approximately 0.0839
with small R, and 0.8365 with large R. A large Q results in a higher average absolute signal value (2.6624), while a
small Q produces a lower value (0.4842). As a result, the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) is highest in the small R and large
Q setting, followed by small R and small Q, large R and large Q, and finally large R and small Q. In practice, a small
Q indicates a stronger temporal trend (i.e., stronger influence of A), whereas a large Q generates data that resemble a
more general linear factor model where A is not restricted to be constant over time. Similarly, a small R corresponds to
low observation noise, while a large R implies higher observational noise.
Figure 3 shows the post-intervention RMSE of TASC and benchmark methods on datasets generated with low
observation noise (small R). For both small Q (left) and large Q (right), RSC demonstrates the best prediction accuracy,
highlighting the strong performance of PCA when observation noise is low. SC performs comparably to RSC when Q
is small, suggesting that the simplex constraint in SC is effective under low observation noise. TASC shows relatively
better performance when Q is small, as expected with a more evident trend A, though it still underperforms compared
to the other benchmarks in this setting. These results suggest that SC and RSC are able to capture the underlying




Figure 3: Post-intervention RMSE of TASC and bench-            Figure 4: Post-intervention RMSE of TASC and bench-
mark methods on datasets generated with low observation        mark methods on datasets generated with high observa-
noise (small R): small Q (left) and large Q (right)            tion noise (large R): small Q (left) and large Q (right)


                                                           7
Time-Aware Synthetic Control (Preprint)




Figure 5: Post-intervention RMSE under low observation           Figure 6: Post-intervention RMSE under low observation
noise and small Q, evaluated across five future prediction       noise and large Q, evaluated across five future prediction
horizons (10 time periods each)                                  horizons (10 time periods each)


structure more effectively—even without explicitly modeling the temporal trend A, which is more noticeable when Q is
small—under low observation noise.
Figure 4 presents a similar plot, this time under high observation noise (i.e., large R). In this high-noise setting, TASC
demonstrates strong performance when Q is small. As Q increases, TASC’s performance declines, similar to the low
observation noise case, but it still shows the best prediction accuracy among all other benchmark methods. Interestingly,
all four methods perform better when Q is small (hence the trend A is evident). Among them, SC proves to be the most
reliable in this regime, exhibiting the lowest variance in RMSE. Overall, TASC appears to be a robust choice under high
observation noise, regardless of the strength of the temporal trend.
Last, we break down the performance under high observation noise into five evenly divided future time periods and
inspect the change in performance as prediction horizon extends. In Figure 5, which shows the results from small Q,
the performance of TASC is stable across prediction periods (near future or further future). In Figure 6, which shows
the results from large Q, the performance of TASC degrades when the prediction horizon is further away (91~100)
compared to the near future (51~60). Similar trend is also observed in other benchmark methods as well.
Finally, we break down the performance under high observation noise into five evenly divided future time periods
and examine how performance changes as the prediction horizon extends. Figure 5, which shows results for small Q,
indicates that TASC maintains relatively stable performance across all prediction periods—whether in the near or more
distant future. In contrast, Figure 6, which presents results for large Q, shows that TASC’s performance deteriorates
more clearly as the prediction horizon extends (91–100) compared to earlier periods (51–60).

5.3   Ablation Study on the Hidden State Dimension

Among the methods we test, TASC and RSC explicitly assume the low-rank structure of data matrix, and use the
approximate rank as a hyperparameter for the algorithm. We denote the hyperparameter fed into the algorithm as d, and
the true data generating parameter as dtrue . We test by varying d and dtrue and compare the performance of TASC and
RSC.
First, we begin by fixing dtrue = 5 and varying the hyperparameter d ∈ 3, 5, 10, 20. Figure 7 presents the post-
intervention RMSE of TASC and RSC across different values of d. For both methods, performance is optimal when
d = dtrue , and under/overestimation worsens the accuracy. Underestimating d leads to significantly worse performance
compared to overestimation, with TASC being more sensitive to underestimation than RSC. In the overestimation
regime, TASC demonstrates greater robustness to the choice of d than RSC.
Next, we vary dtrue ∈ 3, 5, 10, 20 while fixing d = dtrue . Figure 8 presents the post-intervention RMSE of TASC and
RSC across different values of dtrue = d. TASC consistently outperforms RSC across all values of dtrue . This may be
attributed to a structural advantage of TASC, as the true data-generating process aligns with the model assumptions of
TASC. Although the generated data is also compatible with the RSC framework, RSC does not utilize the temporal
trend component A, which may limit its effectiveness.


                                                             8
Time-Aware Synthetic Control (Preprint)




Figure 7: Post-intervention RMSE across different values       Figure 8: Post-intervention RMSE across different values
of d (with fixed dtrue = 5)                                    of dtrue (with fixed d = dtrue )



5.4   Ablation Study on the Number of Donor Units

We tested the effect of increasing the number of donors in the dataset. We varied the number of rows in the panel
data, denoted as N = n + 1, where n represents the number of donor units and the additional row corresponds to the
target unit. The pre-intervention period was fixed at T0 = 50, and the prediction horizon spanned from T0 + 1 = 51 to
T = 100. Figure 9 shows the post-intervention RMSE as N varies. Notably, the best performance for TASC is achieved
when N = T0 = 50. TASC demonstrates robustness, particularly when N is small, showing minimal performance
difference between N = 10 and N = 50. Other synthetic control benchmarks also perform better when N is close to
T0 , while both too many donors (e.g., N = 200) and too few (e.g., N = 10) are detrimental across all methods.




                Figure 9: Post-intervention RMSE with varying N (the number of rows in panel data)


As N increases from 10 to 50, most methods (with the exception of CIM) exhibit improved performance, suggesting
that additional training data in this range is beneficial. However, increasing N from 50 to 200 does not lead to further
improvements, despite the availability of more training data. In fact, it deteriorates the performance in general. We
suspect two possible explanations for this phenomenon: (1) the information content of the random data source saturates
beyond a certain point, and (2) the model structure struggles to benefit from the high-dimensional input space when the
number of features increases while the number of observations remains fixed (i.e., the curse of dimensionality).


                                                           9
Time-Aware Synthetic Control (Preprint)


6     Empirical Evaluation on Real-World Data
In this section, we present more results from the empirical evaluation on real-world datasets. We compare TASC
against three benchmarks used in the previous section: 1) Synthetic Control (SC, [2]), 2) Robust Synthetic Control
(RSC, [12]), and Causal Impact Model (CIM, [25]). Section 6.1 demonstrates the classical synthetic control application
on evaluating Proposition 99 in California, and Sections 6.2 and 6.3 apply synthetic control to predict game score
trajectories in cricket and basketball games, respectively.

6.1   Evaluating Effect of Proposition 99 in California

In this section, we demonstrate our method using a classic
synthetic control application from [3]: evaluating the effect of
Proposition 99. Proposition 99 was a policy enacted in Califor-
nia in 1988 that significantly increased the state’s cigarette tax.
This policy was followed by a noticeable decline in cigarette
sales (black line in Figure 10). To assess whether this de-
cline was causally driven by the policy, synthetic control meth-
ods can be applied to estimate the counterfactual outcome for
California—i.e., what cigarette sales would have looked like
had the policy not been implemented. For economic analyses,
multiple auxiliary predictors are often used to improve predic-
tive accuracy. For example, [3] incorporate variables such as
the average retail price of cigarettes, per capita state personal
income, the percentage of the population aged 15–24, and per
capita beer consumption, in addition to the target time series
(per-capita cigarette sales). However, in our analysis, we inten-
tionally focus on a single predictor, per-capita cigarette sales, to    Figure 10: Per-capita cigarette sales in packs in Cali-
ensure a fair and consistent comparison across different meth-          fornia (black), and estimated counterfactual outcomes
ods. Our goal is not to produce the most accurate estimate              by TASC and other benchmarks. Blue and pink shades
of the effect of the policy, but to evaluate the performance of         denote 95% confidence interval from TASC and CIM.
competing methodologies under a controlled setting.
With this in mind, RSC was implemented with the ridge co-
efficient 0.1 and the approximate rank d = 2, and TASC used the same d = 2 for hidden state dimension. Figure
10 shows the observation from California in black and all predictions lie above the observed trend, with the gap
capturing the policy’s effect. The four estimates are broadly consistent, diverging slightly near 2000. TASC and CIM
present confidence interval estimates, shown in blue and pink shaded areas, respectively. TASC’s confidence interval
is considerably narrower than that of CIM. Notably, CIM’s interval encompasses the observed values for California,
indicating that no strong causal conclusions can be drawn from this analysis.
To evaluate the credibility of these counterfactual estimates, we conduct placebo tests. Since the true counterfactual is
unobservable, we simulate it by treating a donor unit as if it were the target. In each placebo test, we predict a donor
unit’s time series using the remaining donors and assess whether the synthetic control method can accurately reconstruct
the observed outcomes. Figure 11 shows post-intervention root mean squared error (RMSE) from the placebo test with




 Figure 11: Post-intervention RMSE from placebo test                   Figure 12: Post-intervention RMSE with varying d.


                                                              10
Time-Aware Synthetic Control (Preprint)


TASC and other benchmarks. Among these, TASC achieves the lowest median RMSE and smallest variance of RMSE,
suggesting that TASC provided the most reliable estimates among the methods tested in this experimental setting.
Next, we take a deeper dive into comparing TASC and RSC. Among the methods we tested, TASC and RSC explicitly
filter the data to have exactly low-rank signals. As a result, both TASC and RSC require the hyperparameter d, which
denotes the hidden dimension for TASC and the approximate rank for RSC. To examine how the choice of d affects
performance, we evaluate both methods across different values of d. Figure 12 reports the post-intervention RMSE from
the placebo test as d varies. The lowest error occurs at d = 2 for both methods. While RSC’s performance deteriorates
rapidly as d increases, TASC remains relatively stable. This aligns with the simulation results, which showed that TASC
is resilient to overestimating d (Figure 7). Hence, this reconfirms that TASC may offer advantages in settings where the
true value of d is difficult to estimate.




Figure 13: Gap in per-capita cigarette sales (in packs) between the observed outcome and synthetic control predictions
(comparable to Figures 4–7 in [3]). Each row represents a different algorithm—TASC, SC, RSC, and CIM (from top to
bottom)—while each column applies a different threshold for selecting control units: no threshold, at most 10 times
California’s pre-intervention error, 5 times, and 2 times (from left to right).


                                                          11
Time-Aware Synthetic Control (Preprint)


Lastly, following the approach from [3], we plot the difference between the observed outcome and the predicted
counterfactual for California, alongside those of the control states obtained from the placebo test. The first column of
Figure 13 reports the gap between prediction and observation of per-capita cigarette sales (in packs) for California and
the 38 control states. Subsequent columns restrict the set of control states based on the relative quality of pre-intervention
fit, measured by mean-squared error (MSE). The second column includes only control states whose pre-intervention
MSE is no more than 10 times that of California, while the third and fourth columns apply stricter thresholds of 5 and 2
times, respectively.
Notably, the last row (CIM) retains the largest number of control states as stricter thresholds are imposed, indicating
that the accuracy of pre-intervention prediction was similar across states. In contrast, the TASC approach (the first row)
retains substantially fewer control states under the most stringent threshold compared to SC or RSC. This indicates that
the pre-intervention fit for California was more accurate than other states when using TASC. Note that California is
one of the most populated states in the US, and hence the collected data (per capita cigarette sales) may have lower
variance compared to other states due to averaging effect. In such case, TASC may have learned smaller observation
noise variance (R) and yielded more accurate (pre-intervention) fit for California. Indeed, corresponding variance for
California was the smallest (2.58, with median 12.95, standard deviation 36.17 and maximum 170.79). Across all
specifications, California consistently displays the largest gap, while it is more apparent in the plots in the top right
corner (stricter thresholds, TASC method). The estimate effect of policy is similar across methods, diverging only at the
end. TASC and RSC shows flatter estimates closer to 2000, whereas SC and CIM estimates keep increasing.


6.2   Score Trajectory Prediction in Cricket Games

In this section, we demonstrate our method with cricket score trajectory data from Indian Premier League (IPL). The
dataset employed in this study is derived from ball-by-ball records of Indian Premier League matches from April 18,
2008 to March 25th, 2025. In the T20 format, a standard match consists of two innings of 20 overs each, with 6 balls
bowled per over, and one team batting per inning. While the number of deliveries in an inning can occasionally exceed
120 due to penalty balls, this analysis restricts attention to the first 120 legal deliveries of each inning. This selected
1524 out of 2092 score trajectories in the dataset that have at least 120 balls delivered. The scores have been aggregated
cumulatively over the course of each inning per ball.
To simulate a real-world use case, a target match is randomly selected from all 1524 matches, and the donor pool
consists of the n most recent matches that occurred prior to the target match, with the choice from n ∈ {18, 36, 72, 144}.
Each inning is a time series of length T = 120, with a fixed intervention point at T0 = 72. The choice of T0 = 72 is
to balance pre-intervention data between the first 36 balls of power play and the play that follows. The remaining 48
deliveries (t = T0 + 1, . . . , T ) are used for counterfactual inference and evaluation expecting no intervention effect
(placebo test).
We tested TASC against three benchmarks, SC, RSC, and CIM. For all four methods, the data is mean-centered prior to
fitting by subtracting the mean score trajectory calculated from the selected donors. For TASC and RSC, the hidden
state dimension and the number of singular values to keep were both set to be d = 5. RSC is implemented with the
ridge coefficient of 103 , after cross-validation on the pre-intervention data using the values in {10−1 , 100 , . . . , 106 }.
For each method and donor pool size, the experiment is repeated 100 times, each time with a newly selected random
target match.
First, we investigate the effect of donor size on the performance of different methods. Figure 14 shows the overall
post-intervention RMSE across different numbers of donor units n. TASC shows steady improvement as the number of
donors increases up to around n = 72, beyond which performance stabilizes. RSC exhibits the strongest sensitivity to
donor size: it achieves comparable accuracy with very n = 18, but suffers substantial degradation as n grows, likely
due to high-dimensional overfitting. In contrast, SC, constrained to simplex weights, maintains stable performance
across donor sizes. Similarly, CIM maintains performance across donor sizes, with a marginal improvement at n = 144.
TASC achieves the lowest median RMSE across methods for donor sizes n ∈ {36, 72, 144} whereas SC achieves the
lowest when the donor size is n = 18. Across all settings, TASC with n = 72 donor units achieves the lowest median
RMSE of 7.88.
Next, we examine how predictive performance changes over an extended time horizon. Figure 15 presents RMSE
segmented by overs (6-ball intervals), illustrating how forecasting accuracy changes with increasing prediction horizons.
The top plot corresponds to n = 18 donors, a regime where RSC and SC are competitive. RSC achieves strong
short-term accuracy, but its advantage fades as horizon lengthens. SC performs with a lower accuracy in the short-term,
but it performs the best as prediction horizon lengthens. The bottom panel corresponds to n = 72 donors, where TASC
yields the most accurate predictions, with particular strength in more distant future time points. Across both settings,
prediction errors grow with the forecast horizon, reflecting the increasing difficulty of long-range forecasting. The


                                                             12
Time-Aware Synthetic Control (Preprint)




        Figure 14: Overall post-intervention RMSE for TASC, SC, RSC, and CIM across varying donor sizes.




                         Figure 15: Per-over RMSE by prediction horizon for n = 144 donors.


performance of TASC and CIM degrades more slowly than that of the other methods, possibly because they explicitly
encode the temporal evolution of latent factors: when a learnable trend is present, explicitly modeling it improves
long-range forecast accuracy.
Lastly, we compare the confidence interval predictions of TASC and CIM. In terms of point estimation (mean), TASC
and CIM achieved comparable performance in the short-term range, while TASC performed slightly better in long-
term range predictions. Both TASC and CIM not only produce point estimates but also provide confidence interval
predictions: TASC derives them from the covariance estimate of the latent state, whereas CIM obtains them from its
MCMC sampler. Figure 16 displays the average 95% confidence interval width3 of post intervention predictions from
TASC and CIM, with varying number of donors. Although TASC and CIM show similar mean estimation performance,
   3
     The confidence interval width is computed per experiment as the average distance between the upper and lower boundaries of
the confidence interval across all post-intervention time steps.


                                                              13
Time-Aware Synthetic Control (Preprint)


TASC tends to produce narrower confidence intervals, which may facilitate interpretation of intervention effects. This
aligns with the results in Section 6.1, where CIM’s confidence interval included the observed outcome from California,
preventing any causal conclusions from being drawn based on its estimates.




                Figure 16: Post-intervention average confidence interval width for varying number of donors n


6.3        Score Trajectory Prediction in Basketball Games

In this section, we demonstrate our method with basketball score trajectory data from the National Basketball Association
(NBA) games. NBA is a professional basketball league in North America founded in 1946 and currently consists of 30
teams. An NBA game consists of four quarters, each 12 minutes in duration, resulting in a total of 48 minutes of game
play, excluding potential overtime periods. We use the play-by-play data from Kaggle4 to construct a score trajectory
panel dataset. The raw event data has been preprocessed into time series format, with cumulative scores sampled at
uniform intervals of 15 seconds, yielding the total time series of length T = 192 for each game. We only focus on the
first four quarters of the game, and choose the games that lasted for at least 48 minutes from January 2nd, 2020 to June
9th, 2023.
Following the same methodology as with Cricket, a target is randomly selected from all 7574 possible game score
trajectories and the donor pool consists of the n most recent games that occurred prior to the target game date, with the
choice from n = {24, 48, 96, 192}. Each game score trajectory is a time series of length T = 192 (corresponding to
48 minutes of game time measured at 15 second intervals). The intervention point is T0 = 96, which corresponds to
the intervention occurring at halftime. The data is mean-centered prior to fitting using selected donor data, for all four
methods. Similar to the Cricket analysis, the hidden dimension for TASC and the approximate rank for RSC were both
set to be d = 5 and RSC ridge coefficient is 103 , after cross-validation on the pre-intervention data using the values in
{10−1 , 100 , ..., 106 }. For each method and donor pool size, the experiment is repeated 100 times, each with the same
set of random targets.
We test how each method handles growing number of donor data. Figure 17 shows overall post-intervention RMSE
using different sizes of donor pool n ∈ {24, 48, 96, 192, 384}. TASC achieves the lowest median RMSE across n,
with stable performance over changing number of donors. CIM shows similar robustness to increasing n, with slightly
higher RMSE compared to TASC. SC and RSC are relatively more sensitive to high-dimensional learning issues with
increased n, with RSC being more stable than SC. Overall, TASC and CIM yield gradually lower median RMSE as n
increases, whereas SC and RSC behaves in the opposite direction.
With these results, we focus on the case when the lowest post-intervention RMSE is achieved (n = 192) and examine
how prediction accuracy changes over extended time horizon. Figure 18 presents post-intervention RMSE segmented
by half quarter intervals (6 minutes, which comprises 24 time points) with n = 96. In most cases, TASC yields the
lowest RMSE, followed by CIM, RSC, and SC. Prediction accuracy declines as the forecast horizon increases across all
methods, reflecting the inherent challenges of long-term forecasting. CIM and RSC performs comparably to TASC
when predicting the near future (the first half of Q3), but the gap widens as the horizon extends, with a more pronounced
difference emerging in the forecasts for the second half of Q4.

      4
          https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/wyattowalsh/basketball/data


                                                             14
Time-Aware Synthetic Control (Preprint)




        Figure 17: Overall post-intervention RMSE for TASC, SC, RSC, and CIM across varying donor sizes.




     Figure 18: Post-intervention RMSE per half quarter (6 minutes) interval prediction horizon, with n = 192.


7   Conclusion and Future Work

In this work, we introduce TASC, a state-space framework for modeling synthetic control-type data with algorithms
for model learning and counterfactual inference. By explicitly modeling the temporal evolution of latent time-factors,
TASC achieves strong long-term predictive performance. Experiments on synthetic data and real-world cases show that
TASC remains effective under high observational noise, better leverages larger donor pools, is robust to the choice of
hyperparameter d, and produces narrower confidence intervals than CIM.
There are limitations to our current work. The TASC model focuses solely on a single time series, despite the availability
of multivariate time series in many real-world settings. Also, TASC imposes a strictly linear and time-invariant trend,
which limits its flexibility. Lastly, the current EM-based learning algorithm is slow and sensitive to initialization, often
leading to poor fits. Trying multiple initializations may improve fit, but further reduces computational efficiency.


                                                            15
Time-Aware Synthetic Control (Preprint)


Looking ahead, TASC can be extended in several directions to advance causal inference tools for richer panel data. First
is to adopt advanced models, such as more complex latent variable structures and non-linear state-space models. These
enhancements would enable TASC to incorporate multiple auxiliary time series and capture non-linear trends. Second,
we can improve the learning algorithm, for example, by adopting gradient-based EM or MCMC samplers. This is also
linked to developing a more sophisticated model architecture as a future step. Finally, designing diagnostic tools to
identify the conditions under which TASC is most effective would help formalize the empirical findings of this work.

Acknowledgement

This work was partially supported by ONR (N00014-24-1-2687, N00014-24-1-2700), and the Columbia-Dream Sports
AI Innovation Center PhD Fellowship.

References
 [1] David Card and Alan B Krueger. Minimum wages and employment: A case study of the fast food industry in New
     Jersey and Pennsylvania. American Economic Review, 90(5):1397–1420, 2000.
 [2] Alberto Abadie and Javier Gardeazabal. The economic costs of conflict: A case study of the Basque Country.
     American Economic Review, 93(1):113–132, 2003.
 [3] Alberto Abadie, Alexis Diamond, and Jens Hainmueller. Synthetic control methods for comparative case studies:
     Estimating the effect of California’s tobacco control program. Journal of the American Statistical Association,
     105(490):493–505, 2010.
 [4] Alberto Abadie and Jérémy L’Hour. A penalized synthetic control estimator for disaggregated data. Journal of the
     American Statistical Association, 116(536):1817–1834, 2021.
 [5] Alberto Abadie, Alexis Diamond, and Jens Hainmueller. Comparative politics and the synthetic control method.
     American Journal of Political Science, 59(2):495–510, 2015.
 [6] Noémi Kreif, Richard Grieve, Dominik Hangartner, Alex James Turner, Silviya Nikolova, and Matt Sutton.
     Examination of the synthetic control method for evaluating health policies with multiple treated units. Health
     economics, 25(12):1514–1528, 2016.
 [7] Michael W Robbins, Jessica Saunders, and Beau Kilmer. A framework for synthetic control methods with high-
     dimensional, micro-level data: evaluating a neighborhood-specific crime intervention. Journal of the American
     Statistical Association, 112(517):109–126, 2017.
 [8] Giacomo Vagni and Richard Breen. Earnings and income penalties for motherhood: estimates for British women
     using the individual synthetic control method. European Sociological Review, 37(5):834–848, 2021.
 [9] Kristian Thorlund, Louis Dron, Jay JH Park, and Edward J Mills. Synthetic and external controls in clinical
     trials–a primer for researchers. Clinical epidemiology, pages 457–467, 2020.
[10] Dennis Shen, Anish Agarwal, Vishal Misra, Bjoern Schelter, Devavrat Shah, Helen Shiells, and Claude Wischik.
     Obtaining personalized predictions from a randomized controlled trial on alzheimer’s disease. Scientific Reports,
     15(1):1671, 2025.
[11] Madeleine Udell and Alex Townsend. Why are big data matrices approximately low rank? SIAM Journal on
     Mathematics of Data Science, 1(1):144–160, 2019.
[12] Muhammad Amjad, Devavrat Shah, and Dennis Shen. Robust synthetic control. Journal of Machine Learning
     Research, 19(22):1–51, 2018.
[13] Susan Athey, Mohsen Bayati, Nikolay Doudchenko, Guido Imbens, and Khashayar Khosravi. Matrix completion
     methods for causal panel data models. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 116:1716–1730, 2021.
[14] Nikolay Doudchenko and Guido W Imbens. Balancing, regression, difference-in-differences and synthetic control
     methods: A synthesis, 2016. NBER Working Paper 22791.
[15] Muhammad Amjad, Vishal Misra, Devavrat Shah, and Dennis Shen. mRSC: Multi-dimensional robust synthetic
     control. Proceedings of the ACM on Measurement and Analysis of Computing Systems, 3(2):1–27, 2019.
[16] Arindrajit Dube and Ben Zipperer. Pooling multiple case studies using synthetic controls: An application to
     minimum wage policies, 2015. IZA Discussion Paper No. 8944.
[17] Yiqing Xu. Generalized synthetic control method: Causal inference with interactive fixed effects models. Political
     Analysis, 25(1):57–76, 2017.


                                                          16
Time-Aware Synthetic Control (Preprint)


[18] Saeyoung Rho, Andrew Tang, Noah Bergam, Rachel Cummings, and Vishal Misra. Clustersc: Advancing
     synthetic control with donor selection. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pages
     109–117. PMLR, 2025.
[19] Eli Ben-Michael, Avi Feller, and Jesse Rothstein. The augmented synthetic control method. Journal of the
     American Statistical Association, 116(536):1789–1803, 2021.
[20] Alberto Abadie. Using synthetic controls: Feasibility, data requirements, and methodological aspects. Journal of
     Economic Literature, 59(2):391–425, 2021.
[21] James H Stock and Mark W Watson. Forecasting inflation. Journal of monetary economics, 44(2):293–335, 1999.
[22] Allan W Gregory and Allen C Head. Common and country-specific fluctuations in productivity, investment, and
     the current account. Journal of Monetary Economics, 44(3):423–451, 1999.
[23] Mario Forni, Marc Hallin, Marco Lippi, and Lucrezia Reichlin. The generalized dynamic-factor model: Identifica-
     tion and estimation. Review of Economics and statistics, 82(4):540–554, 2000.
[24] Victor Chernozhukov, Kaspar Wüthrich, and Yinchu Zhu. An exact and robust conformal inference method for
     counterfactual and synthetic controls. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 116(536):1849–1864, 2021.
[25] Kay H Brodersen, Fabian Gallusser, Jim Koehler, Nicolas Remy, and Steven L Scott. Inferring causal impact
     using bayesian structural time-series models. The Annals of Applied Statistics, 9(1):247–274, 2015.
[26] Danny Klinenberg. Synthetic control with time varying coefficients a state space approach with bayesian shrinkage.
     Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 41(4):1065–1076, 2023.
[27] Junzhe Shao, Mingzhang Yin, Xiaoxuan Cai, and Linda Valeri. Generalized synthetic control method with
     state-space model. In NeurIPS 2022 Workshop on Causality for Real-world Impact, 2022.
[28] James Durbin and Siem Jan Koopman. Time Series Analysis by State Space Methods, volume 38 of Oxford
     Statistical Science Series. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2nd edition, 2012.




                                                          17
Time-Aware Synthetic Control (Preprint)


A    Theoretical Justification of TASC
In this section, we elaborate more on the theoretical justifications behind TASC. We make the intuition outlined in
Section 3.3 precise by showing that classical SC and many of its variants, being permutation-invariant, may overlook
predictive information that TASC’s structure is designed to recover. This connection can be formalized through the data
processing inequality.
A central claim of our framework is that the classical synthetic control method and many of its variants are permutation-
invariant over time, and therefore cannot exploit predictive information embedded in temporal ordering. In contrast,
our TASC approach leverages a state-space model and the Kalman filter to extract minimal sufficient statistics for
forecasting future outcomes. We now formalize this claim using the data processing inequality. Let FTseq      0
                                                                                                                 denote the
                                                                     T0          bag
σ-algebra generated by the ordered pre-treatment trajectories {yt }t=1 , and FT0 the σ-algebra generated by the same
data treated as an unordered multiset of columns. Let x̂T0 |T0 and P̂T0 |T0 denote the filtered hidden state and covariance
at T0 based on the observation up to T0 .
Proposition A.1. Consider the panel data following Equations (2) and (3). Then, the following holds.

      1. (Kalman Sufficiency) The filtered state x̂T0 |T0 and covariance P̂T0 |T0 obtained from the Kalman filter are
         minimal sufficient statistics for predicting {yt }t>T0 . That is,
                                             yt ⊥⊥ FTseq
                                                      0
                                                         (x̂T0 |T0 , P̂T0 |T0 ),      t > T0 .

      2. (Information Loss by Permutation Invariance) Since FTbag     0
                                                                         ⊂ FTseq
                                                                               0
                                                                                  for any T0 > 1, the data processing
         inequality (i.e., Blackwell’s ordering of information structures) implies that,
                                                              
                                           I {yt }t>T0 ; FTbag   ≤ I {yt }t>T0 ; FTseq
                                                                                       
                                                            0                       0
                                                                                         ,

         with strict inequality whenever A ̸= 0 and Q is finite (i.e., the temporal dynamics carry a predictive signal).
                                                                                                                 KF
      3. (Dominance) Consequently, the Bayes-optimal predictor based on Kalman sufficient statistics ŷ0,t           = E[y0,t |
         x̂T0 |T0 , P̂T0 |T0 ] achieves a mean squared error that is theoretically no larger than that of permutation-invariant
                          bag
         predictors ŷ0,t      , measurable with respect to FTbag
                                                                0
                                                                  , under these assumptions.
                                                                          h                i
                                                           KF 2
                                                                                    bag 2
                                                E (y0,t − ŷ0,t ) ≤ E (y0,t − ŷ0,t      ) .

Proof Sketch. Let Y − ∈ RN ×T0 be the pre-treatment donor matrix (rows = donors, columns = time indices), and
y0− ∈ RT0 the pre-treatment vector for the target unit. The classical SC solves
                                           f ⋆ = arg min        ∥y0− − f ⊤ Y − ∥2 ,
                                                      f ∈∆n−1

where ∆n−1 is the n-dimensional unit simplex. For any permutation matrix Π ∈ RT0 ×T0 acting on the time indices
(columns), we have
                                       ∥y0− Π − f ⊤ Y − Π∥2 = ∥y0− − f ⊤ Y − ∥2 ,
since the Euclidean norm is invariant under reordering. Thus SC and RSC objectives are unaffected by permutations of
time, confirming permutation invariance.
Part 1. follows from the standard sufficiency of the Kalman filter in linear Gaussian models: (x̂T0 |T0 , PT0 |T0 ) are
sufficient for p(yt | y1:T0 ) for any t > T0 (see, e.g., [28]).
Part 2. follows since FTbag
                         0
                            ⊂ FTseq
                                 0
                                    ; by the data processing inequality and Blackwell’s ordering, predictors restricted to
FT0 cannot outperform those using FTseq
 bag
                                          0
                                            , except in degenerate cases (A = 0).
Part 3. then follows directly: the Kalman-based predictor uses sufficient statistics from FTseq
                                                                                             0
                                                                                                , while permutation-
                               bag
invariant SC is restricted to FT0 , implying weak dominance in MSE and strict dominance when temporal structure is
present.
Remark A.2. This result motivates a natural two-stage approach: (i) extract Kalman sufficient statistics from the
temporal structure, then (ii) apply SC to these statistics instead of raw observations. Our TASC formulation can be
viewed as a unification of this two-stage Kalman filter and synthetic control procedure into a generative model, with


                                                             18
Time-Aware Synthetic Control (Preprint)


improved robustness under model misspecification and noisy parameter estimation. Empirically, this can be validated
via a permutation stress test: permutation-invariant methods should show no degradation when pre-treatment time
indices are shuffled, while TASC should degrade, confirming that it exploits temporal information absent in classical
approaches.

B   Basic Algorithms
In this section, we provide the full pseudocode for the basic algorithms comprising the EM approach: Kalman Filter
(Algorithm 4), Kalman Filter with Infinite Variance (Algorithm 5), RTS Smoother (Algorithm 6), the M-step with MLE
approach (Algorithm 7).

Algorithm 4: Kalman Filter
Input :yk ∈ Rn+1 , previous estimate mk−1 , Pk−1 , current parameter θ = {A, H, Q, R, m0 , P0 }
Output :mk , Pk
mk|k−1 ← Amk−1                                 /* prediction from the previous timestep k − 1 */
                  ⊤
Pk|k−1 ← APk−1 A + Q                           /* prediction from the previous timestep k − 1 */
vk ← yk − Hmk|k−1
Sk ← HPk|k−1 H ⊤ + R
Kk ← Pk|k−1 H ⊤ Sk−1                                                                   /* Kalman Gain */
mk ← mk|k−1 + Kk vk                                                   /* Update after observing yk */
Pk ← Pk|k−1 − Kk Sk Kk⊤                                               /* Update after observing yk */



Algorithm 5: Kalman Filter with Infinite Variance
Input :yk ∈ Rn+1 with the target(first) element missing, previous estimate mk−1 , Pk−1 , current parameter
         θ′ = {A, H, Q, R, m0 , P0 }, where R1,1 ′
                                                    =∞
Output :mk , Pk                                       
                                     h⊤ 1     ′    ∞ 0
Define h1 , H2 , R2 from H =               ,R =
                                     H2            0 R2
        ⊤                               ⊤
yk ← [h1 mk|k−1 , y1,k , . . . , yn,k ]                                     /* augment target values */
mk|k−1 ← Amk−1                                      /* prediction from the previous timestep k − 1 */
Pk|k−1 ← APk−1 A⊤ + Q                               /* prediction from the previous timestep k − 1 */
vk ← yk − Hmk|k−1                                                      /* the first element is zero */
                   ⊤      ′
Sk ← HP   k|k−1 H    + R                    
  −1       0                 0
Sk ←                                                                          /* by Schur Complement */
           0 (H2 Pk|k−1 H2⊤ + R2 )−1
                     −1
Kk ← Pk|k−1 H ⊤ Sk
mk ← mk|k−1 + Kk vk                                                    /* Update after observing yk */
Pk ← Pk|k−1 − Kk Sk Kk⊤                                                /* Update after observing yk */



Algorithm 6: Rauch–Tung–Striebel (RTS) Smoother
Input :Kalman filter estimate mk , Pk , smoothed estimate msk+1 , Pk+1
                                                                   s
                                                                       , current parameter
        θ = {A, H, Q, R, m0 , P0 }
Output :msk , Pks
mk+1|k ← Amk                                     /* prediction from Kalman filter estimate mk */
Pk+1|k ← APk A⊤ + Q                               /* prediction from Kalman filter estimate Pk */
                −1
Gk ← Pk A⊤ Pk+1|k
msk ← mk + Gk [msk+1 − mk+1|k ]                   /* mst = mt for the last timestep t = T0 or T */
  s                s             ⊤
Pk ← Pk + Gk [Pk+1 − Pk+1|k ]Gk                    /* Pts = Pt for the last timestep t = T0 or T */
        s     s
return mk , Pk , Gk



                                                         19
Time-Aware Synthetic Control (Preprint)



Algorithm 7: Parameter Update (M-Step) with MLE Approach
Input :current parameter θ = {A, H, Q, R, m0 , P0 }, length of the sequence T , RTS parameters msk , Pks , Gk for
         all k ∈ {0, . . . , T }, observations yk for all k ∈ {1, . . . , T }
Output :θ′
Define P
          T
Σ = T1 k=1 Pks + msk msk ⊤
          T
Φ = T1 k=1 Pk−1 s
                     + msk−1 msk−1 ⊤
       P
     1
       P  T        s⊤
B = T k=1 yk mk
       PT                                 ⊤
C = T1 k=1 Pks G⊤  k−1 + mk mk−1
                                 s s
          T
D = T1 k=1 yk yk ⊤
       P
Update
A′ ← CΦ−1
H ′ ← BΣ−1
Q′ ← Diag(Σ − 2CA⊤ + AΦA⊤ ) /* Diag(·) keeps only the diagonal elements of the input */
R′ ← Diag(D − 2BH ⊤ + HΣH ⊤ )
m′0 ← ms0
P0′ ← P0s + (ms0 − m0 )(ms0 − m0 )⊤
return θ′ = {A′ , H ′ , Q′ , R′ , m′0 , P0′ }


C    Benchmark Synthetic Control Algorithms
In this section, we provide a full algorithm description for the benchmark synthetic control algorithms used in Sections
5 and 6.
The classical Synthetic Control (SC) performs a vertical regression with simplex constraint [3]. Algorithm 8 shows
the classical SC implemented in our study, where the importance matrix V is set to an identity matrix. Note that our
implementation in Proposition 99 study (Section 6.1) is slightly different from the original analysis (in [3]) because we
only use the target time series of interest (per capita tobacco sales in packs) without any additional covariates.

Algorithm 8: Synthetic Control [3]
Data: Target unit’s pre-intervention data Y1− ∈ RT0 , Donor data Y = [Y − , Y + ] ∈ Rn×T
Result: Counterfactual prediction Ŷ1+ , SC weights f
1. Learn                                             Pn
f = arg minf ||Y1− − f ⊤ Y − ||2 where 0 ≤ f ≤ 1, i=1 fi = 1                          /* Simplex constraint */
2. Project Ŷ1+ = f (Y + )
3. Infer the estimated causal effect of the intervention for the target is Y1+ − Ŷ1+

Robust Synthetic Control (RSC, [12]) performs hard singular-value thresholding (HSVT) as a pre-processing step to
denoise the observation data. Then, it learns a vertical regression model using the pre-intervention portion of the data,
and projects with the post-intervention data for counterfactual inference. Algorithm 9 describes our adoption of the
original algorithm with the observation probability p = 1 (no missing data).




                                                           20
Time-Aware Synthetic Control (Preprint)




Algorithm 9: Robust Synthetic Control [12]
Data: Target unit’s pre-intervention data Y1− ∈ RT0 , Donor data Y = [Y − , Y + ] ∈ Rn×T , Number of singular
       values to keep d
Result: Counterfactual prediction Ŷ1+ , SC weights f
1-1. Denoise
     Pmin(n,T )
Y = i=1           si ui vi⊤                                     /* Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) */
     Pd
Ỹ = i=1 si ui vi⊤                                      /* Hard Singular Value Thresholding (HSVT) */
1-2. Learn f = arg minf ||Y1− − f ⊤ Ỹ − ||2 + λ||f ||2
2. Project Ŷ1+ = f ⊤ Ỹ +
3. Infer the estimated causal effect of the intervention for the target is Y1+ − Ŷ1+




                                                       21
