                                          A Machine Learning Framework for Off Ball Defensive Role and
                                                      Performance Evaluation in Football
                                                  Sean Groom1,2 , Francisco Belo2 , Axl Rice2 , Liam Anderson3 , and Shuo Wang1*
                                                  1
                                                  School of Computer Science, The University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK
                                                                2
                                                                  Nottingham Forest Football Club, Nottingham, UK
                                             3
                                               School of Sport, Exercise and Rehabilitation Sciences, The University of Birmingham,
arXiv:2601.00748v1 [cs.LG] 2 Jan 2026




                                                                                 Birmingham, UK
                                                                   *
                                                                     Corresponding author: s.wang.2@bham.ac.uk



                                                                                             Abstract
                                              Evaluating off-ball defensive performance in football is challenging, as traditional metrics do not cap-
                                              ture the nuanced coordinated movements that limit opponent action selection and success probabilities.
                                              Although widely used possession value models excel at appraising on-ball actions, their application to
                                              defense remains limited. Existing counterfactual methods, such as ghosting models, help extend these
                                              analyses but often rely on simulating ”average” behavior that lacks tactical context. To address this, we
                                              introduce a covariate-dependent Hidden Markov Model (CDHMM) tailored to corner kicks, a highly
                                              structured aspect of football games. Our label-free model infers time-resolved man-marking and zonal
                                              assignments directly from player tracking data. We leverage these assignments to propose a novel frame-
                                              work for defensive credit attribution and a role-conditioned ghosting method for counterfactual analysis
                                              of off-ball defensive performance. We show how these contributions provide a interpretable evaluation
                                              of defensive contributions against context-aware baselines.


                                        Introduction
                                        Elite sporting organizations are increasingly leveraging machine learning to inform tactical planning and
                                        player evaluation. This advancement is fueled by rich datasets, including event data (e.g., passes and shots)
                                        and player tracking data from multi-camera systems [1, 2]. For instance, pitch control models [3, 4, 5]
                                        estimate a team’s probability of controlling different areas of the field. While these models are valuable
                                        for visualizing territorial dominance, they often fail to appraise the contextual value of those areas within
                                        a specific game state. Similarly, possession value models [6, 7, 8, 9, 10], which appraise on-ball actions,
                                        face significant challenges when applied to defensive performance analysis [11]. This is because defensive
                                        play presents unique appraisal problems, player’s individual actions are not the only important considera-
                                        tion, but also their coordinated movements with teammates, which makes it difficult to isolate individual
                                        contributions. Furthermore, successful defensive play is often defined by actions that don’t occur, i.e. pre-
                                        venting a pass or a shot [12, 13, 14]. Traditional metrics like tackles and interceptions are insufficient as they
                                        don’t capture the subtle ways defenders constrain attacking options. Consequently, the analysis of defensive
                                        performance significantly lags behind that of offensive play.
                                            To address the limitations of traditional metrics, recent research has explored counterfactual analysis as
                                        a means of evaluating defensive performance. A notable example is the use of ”ghosting” models, which
                                        generate simulated player trajectories to analyze defensive behavior by measuring how a player’s actual


                                                                                                 1
movement alters offensive outcomes—such as pass completion or shot quality—when compared to a hy-
pothetical ”ghost” player [15, 16, 17]. This approach provides a powerful way to quantify a defender’s
impact beyond simple event counts. However, the application of these techniques in football remains lim-
ited [18], and they often rely on simulating ”average” behavior, which may not align with a team’s specific
tactical system. More recent research has attempted to move beyond this by introducing latent role variables
into generative or predictive models of player motion [19, 20]. While these roles help the model represent
coordinated team structures, they are designed to capture statistical regularities in movement rather than
interpretable tactical categories familiar to coaches (e.g., man-marking or zonal defending). To date, such
models have been primarily evaluated for predictive accuracy, not for counterfactual assessment of tactical
performance. Therefore, conditioning counterfactual generation on interpretable tactical roles may offer
more relevant insights for coaching and performance analysis.
     Attempts to value off-ball defence in football have historically been limited, due in part to the difficulty
of linking defensive positioning to observable outcomes. Recently, graph-based deep learning approaches
have begun to address this gap in open play. Everett et al. [21] introduce GAPP, an attention-based frame-
work that estimates Defender Influence by predicting pass reception probabilities using Graph Attention
Networks. By leveraging attention weights and node-masking interventions, their method provides local,
instance-level explanations of which defenders most strongly affect specific attacking options.
     However, as established in prior work on model interpretability, attention mechanisms—while often
predictive and locally faithful—do not in themselves constitute explanations of causal or semantic structure
[22, 23]. In particular, attention weights are not guaranteed to correspond to uniquely meaningful roles
or responsibilities unless such concepts are explicitly represented in the model. In the context of off-ball
defending, this means that high attention or influence scores indicate that a defender affected an outcome, but
not why this occured. Moreover, attention-masking-based influence measures implicitly compare observed
behaviour to the absence of a defender’s contribution, rather than to a realistic alternative execution of the
same defensive role, limiting their ability to support structurally grounded tactical reasoning.
     In parallel, Kim et al. propose DEFCON [24], a probabilistic framework that assigns defensive credit
by marginalising over learned action selection, success, and defender responsibility probabilities to estimate
marginal reductions in Expected Possession Value (EPV). This formulation yields a principled and stable
attribution of defensive value and avoids reliance on explicit attention masking, making it well-suited to
aggregating player contributions across matches and contexts. Importantly, DEFCON evaluates defenders
relative to the observed defensive organisation, attributing credit within a fixed tactical configuration.
     Set pieces, particularly corner kicks, offer a structured and valuable context for studying defensive be-
havior. Occurring roughly ten times per match and accounting for a significant percentage of goals (11% of
all goals in the 2024/2025 English Premier League season, calculated from Statsbomb event data), corners
are highly scripted, meaning that improvements in performance can lead to substantial gains without need-
ing to acquire new personnel. Their impact is significant enough that many clubs now employ dedicated
set-piece coaches. Defensive instructions during corners typically involve either tracking a specific oppo-
nent (man-marking) or zonal marking, where players guard predefined locations. Most teams adopt hybrid
strategies that reflect their tactical identity. Prior work has largely focused on scheme identification and
pattern discovery. For example, Shaw & Gopaladesikan mapped recurring corner routines and inferred de-
fender roles [25]. Bauer et al. [26] developed an approach using a convolutional–recurrent neural networks
(CNN–LSTM) to assign defenders various roles, including zonal defending and man-marking roles, yielding
who was marking whom but at the cost of a hand-labelled dataset that is neither publicly nor commercially
available. DeepMind and Liverpool FC’s TacticAI utilises D2 -equivariant graph neural networks to predict
reception and shot outcomes, as well as generating suggestions on how to improve these outcomes [27].
Although TacticAI’s suggestions were preferred by expert raters, they are not explicitly parameterized by
interpretable tactical roles. Accordingly, we seek a framework that infers time-resolved tactical roles from
tracking data without time-intensive labeling. This framework will be coupled with outcome prediction

                                                       2
models to facilitate counterfactual evaluation and individual defensive performance evaluation.
    Addressing this gap, we introduce a covariate-dependent Hidden Markov Model (CDHMM) [28, 29]
specifically tailored for the analysis of corner kicks. In our model, the latent states are designed to represent
interpretable tactical roles, such as which defender is assigned to man-mark a specific opponent and which
defenders occupy zonal positions. The model’s covariate-dependent transitions capture the dynamic nature
of set-play behavior, allowing it to infer time-resolved tactical assignments and derive team- and delivery-
specific zonal structures directly from tracking data without the need for manual labeling of roles.
    We leverage these role assignments in two key ways. First, they provide coach-facing profiles of de-
fender and attacker behaviour at set plays and extend existing outcome models (e.g., reception probability,
expected threat, shot likelihood) to the off-ball domain by attributing defensive credit to specific players in
specific roles. Second, we define role-conditioned ghosts, counterfactual baselines that replace a defender
with an average counterpart from the same tactical role and team context, enabling situation-specific, role-
aware off-ball performance analysis. We illustrate practical utility via a reception-prediction case study and
discuss generalization to other outcome models such as expected threat. This research was conducted in col-
laboration with, and validated by, professional football analysts and coaches from an elite level professional
club, including the club’s set-piece coach.
    Our work is complementary in spirit but distinct in emphasis to Everett et al. and Kim et al. Rather than
treating defensive organisation as implicit context, we model it explicitly through latent defensive roles, such
as man-marking and zonal coverage, and their temporal evolution during set pieces. This representation en-
ables both player-level evaluation and structurally grounded counterfactual analysis, allowing alternative
defensive organisations or role assignments to be compared directly. As a result, while recent approaches
quantify how much defensive value is realised within an existing structure, our framework makes it addition-
ally possible to ask how defensive value would change under different, tactically plausible organisational
choices, supporting decision-making and tactical analysis.
    Contributions

    • We introduce a label-free CDHMM for corner kicks that jointly infers time-resolved man-marking
      and zonal assignments, as well as team- and delivery-specific zonal structures, directly from tracking
      data. Building on our earlier IT4PSS workshop model [30], we extend the transition dynamics with a
      covariate-dependent formulation and provide substantially expanded validation and analysis.

    • We propose coach-facing behavioural metrics, inspired by the basketball HMM of Franks et al. [31],
      derived from the inferred man-marking and zonal roles to provide interpretable insights for tactical
      analysis.

    • We present a novel method for off-ball defensive credit attribution. Unlike general open-play models
      that distribute credit via implicit responsibility scores [24], our method attributes value based on
      explicitly inferred, time-resolved tactical assignments.

    To our knowledge, we present the first ghosting framework in football that conditions defender baselines
on interpretable tactical roles learned directly from data. This enables a more structured and context-aware
counterfactual evaluation of defensive performance and offers a distinct advantage over attention-masking
techniques [21] by enabling counterfactual comparisons against average role-specific behavior rather than
the absence of a defender.




                                                       3
Results
Data and Preprocessing
This study utilizes tracking data covering four complete English Premier League seasons, from 2020/21
through to 2023/24. Corner kick sequences were extracted by aligning tracking data with synchronized
event logs, resulting in an initial dataset of 14,678 corners. Corners involving red cards or substitution errors
were excluded from analysis to ensure data quality. Individual CDHMMs were trained separately for each
defending team, and further distinguished by corner kick delivery type, specifically categorizing sequences
as either inswinging or outswinging. For downstream tasks, such as recipient and shot prediction described
later in this work, short corners—defined as short passes to a nearby teammate rather than deliveries into the
penalty area—were excluded based on event data annotations, resulting in a dataset of 13,752 corners. To
standardize the data, all corner sequences were canonicalised: each sequence was translated and reflected
so that all deliveries appear to originate from the top-right corner of the pitch, with the coordinate system’s
origin at the defending team’s penalty spot. Sequences were captured starting one second before the corner
kick and were truncated either two seconds after delivery or upon the second subsequent on-ball event,
whichever occurred first. This approach aligns with a prior methodology [25]. Finally, to simplify our
analysis of defensive marking, goalkeepers were excluded from man-marking state considerations.

Inferred Defensive Behaviors from the CDHMM
Our framework utilizes a covariate-dependent Hidden Markov Model (CDHMM) to analyze defensive be-
havior during corner kicks. The model represents each defender’s actions as a sequence of latent states
over time, which correspond to interpretable tactical roles, including man-marking a specific attacker or
defending a fixed zonal region of the pitch. At each timestep, the model determines a defender’s most likely
state based on their observed position, and transitions between states are governed by probabilities that dy-
namically adapt to sequence specific covariates. This approach allows us to unsupervisedly infer tactical
dynamics and role changes directly from tracking data, without the need for manual labels.
    The CDHMM framework provides a granular, time-resolved analysis of defensive behavior. Figure
1 visualizes the inferred defensive assignments at a single time step during a corner routine. The model
distinguishes between man-marking roles (blue circles linked by dashed lines to an assigned attacker) and
zonal defending roles (blue triangles positioned in a compact structure across the goalmouth). This mixture
of roles accurately reflects the hybrid defensive strategies common in professional football. These roles
and assignments are not pre-defined; instead, they emerge directly from the model’s unsupervised learning
of spatio-temporal patterns, highlighting its ability to capture complex tactical structures without manual
labeling.
    The CDHMM’s emission distribution defines the likelihood of a defender’s position given their inferred
tactical role. For man-marking states, this distribution depends on the assigned attacker’s location, modeling
how closely a defender tracks their opponent. For zonal states, emissions are modeled as bivariate Gaussians
centered on fixed regions of the pitch. A key feature of our approach is that these zonal emission distributions
are learned separately for each team and corner delivery type (inswinging or outswinging), enabling the
model to capture the nuanced spatial structures of different defensive schemes.
    Figure 2 visualizes the estimated zonal distributions for a single team during the 2023/24 season. Each
zone is represented by a bivariate Gaussian, with the red dot indicating the estimated mean position and
the ellipse showing the 66% confidence interval. The color of the ellipse encodes the average duration a
defender spends in that zone before transitioning to a man-marking assignment.
    The results reveal that zonal structures differ markedly between delivery types. For inswinging corners,
zones tend to concentrate near the goalmouth, while for outswinging corners, the structure is more dispersed,


                                                       4
Figure 1: A visualization of a team defending an inswinging corner. Blue circles represent defenders assigned to
man-marking roles, with dashed black lines connecting them to their assigned attacker (red circles). Blue triangles
indicate defenders in zonal marking roles, positioned in a compact structure near the goalmouth.




                                                        5
(a) Estimated zonal states for a team defending            (b) Estimated zonal states for a team defending
inswinging corners.                                        outswinging corners.

Figure 2: This figure illustrates the estimated zonal states for a team from the 2023/24 Premier League season when
defending against inswinging and outswinging corner deliveries. Each sub-figure presents 10 zonal emission distri-
butions, marked by a red circle indicating the mean position and encircled by a 66% confidence interval. The colour
of each ellipse denotes the average fraction of the corner sequence duration that a defender spends in that zonal state
before transitioning to a man-marking state. Pitch markings are shown in black; goalposts are represented by black
squares and the penalty spot by a black circle.


with coverage extending toward the edge of the penalty area. This highlights the model’s sensitivity to
tactical context.
    In addition to learning zonal structures, the CDHMM also estimates how defenders position themselves
relative to their assigned attacker when engaged in man-marking. A key parameter governing this behaviour
is γo , that governs how tightly defenders position themselves relative to their assigned attacker. This pa-
rameter captures the extent to which a defender ”shades” toward the attacker along the line connecting the
attacker to the goalmouth, which can be interpreted as marking tightness.
    To account for spatial variation, we estimate separate γo values for each 3 m × 3 m bin on the pitch, al-
lowing the model to flexibly capture how man-marking behaviour changes across different areas. In general,
we find that defenders mark more tightly as attackers approach the goal, reflecting the natural compression
of player spacing and increased defensive urgency in central areas.
    Figure 3 shows 2023/24 league-average γo values across the pitch for inswinging and outswinging de-
liveries. These maps are produced by averaging the learned parameters from each team’s CDHMM across
an entire season. The results reveal subtle but consistent differences in defensive behaviour across delivery
types: outswinging corners are associated with slightly tighter marking over a broader region, particularly
beyond the near-post zone.

Covariate-Dependent Transition Model
A core feature of the CDHMM is its covariate-dependent transition model, which allows transition probabil-
ities between states to vary dynamically with the game state. The model learns linear weight vectors (β) that
govern different types of transitions. For example, βm determines the probability of a defender continuing
to mark the same attacker, while βz controls the probability of a defender remaining in a zonal role. We
also define a switching parameter, βs , which governs the probability of a defender changing man-marking
assignments or transitioning from a zonal role to a man-marking one. Transitions from man-marking to
zonal states are not permitted in our model based on discussions with coaches and analysts. This dynamic


                                                          6
Figure 3: A comparison of league-average man-marking factors, γo , across the pitch for inswinging (left) and
outswinging (right) corner deliveries. The heatmaps reveal differences in defensive behaviour, outswinging corners
are associated with slightly tighter man-marking across a broader area, particularly beyond the near-post zone. In both
cases, the average offset between defenders and their assigned attackers decreases as the attacker nears the goal.


transition structure enables the model to capture the fluid nature of defensive roles during a set piece. A full
list of covariates and details of how these probabilities are computed are provided in the Methods section.
     The CDHMM’s dynamic transition model provides insights into how defensive behaviors evolve during
a corner. Figure 4 shows the distribution of learned transition weight parameters (β) across all teams and
delivery types.
     We find that some aspects of transition behaviour are consistent across teams. For example, the relatively
narrow and approximately zero-centered, distribution of βm values for inswinging corners (top left) suggests
that teams adopt broadly similar policies for maintaining man-marking assignments. The bottom left panel
further confirms this, showing only minor within-team changes in man-marking behaviour between delivery
types.
     By contrast, more variation is observed in zonal self-transitions. The distribution of βz parameters (top
middle) is wider, and the corresponding bottom middle plot reveals large within-team differences between
inswinging and outswinging corners. This reflects the influence of delivery-specific zonal configurations on
defensive behaviour — particularly the fact that different zones are occupied in each delivery type and that
defenders tend to remain in zonal roles for different durations depending on the delivery.
     The CDHMM’s dynamic transition model provides further insights into how defensive behaviors evolve
based on player movement. Figure 5 visualizes the one-second man-marking transition probability, p25      m de-
rived from a single team’s βm parameters. In these heatmaps, the attacker is fixed at the origin and moves
to the right, while the defender’s velocity increases across the panels from left to right. The heatmaps show
the spatial distribution of the continuation probability, revealing how the model dynamically adapts to the
relative motion between the players. As the defender’s speed increases, the model assigns lower proba-
bilities to trailing positions and higher values to regions more aligned with the attacker’s trajectory. This
demonstrates the model’s ability to capture the influence of velocity alignment on the predicted persistence
of a man-marking assignment. Additional examples of learned transition surfaces under different configura-
tions are provided in the Appendix (Figure 12), further illustrating the flexibility of the model in capturing
context-dependent marking behaviours.




                                                          7
Figure 4: Distribution of learned transition model parameters for different defensive behaviours during all 2023/24
season corner kicks. Each column corresponds to a transition type: βm for continuing to man-mark the same attacker,
βz for continuing to zonally defend a designated zone, and βs for switching from zonal or one man-marking state
to another man-marking assignment. The top two rows show the distribution of parameter weights across all teams
for inswinging and outswinging deliveries, respectively. The bottom row illustrates within-team differences between
inswinging and outswinging deliveries, highlighting delivery-specific tactical adaptations. These parameters are esti-
mated from team and delivery specific Hidden Markov Models.




                                                          8
Figure 5: Each subplot shows how the probability of continuing to man-mark a specific attacker (pm ) varies spatially
under different defender velocities for an individual team in the 2023/24 season during inswinging corners. The
attacker is fixed at the origin (0, 0) and moves rightward with velocity (2.0, 0.0), with height 1.85 m and weight 82 kg.
In all panels, the defender moves in the same direction (rightward), with speed increasing from left to right. Red
arrows indicate the attacker’s velocity vector; green arrows in the top-right corner of each plot indicate the defender’s
velocity. We plot three iso-probability contours at pm = 0.25, 0.5, and 0.75 to highlight decision boundaries. As
defender speed increases, the model assigns lower pm values to trailing positions and higher values to regions more
aligned with the attacker’s trajectory, reflecting the influence of velocity alignment on predicted marking persistence.
Note that since data is sampled at 25 frames per second, the one-second transition probability of maintaining a man-
marking assignment is given by p25   m.



Latent state–derived characterisation of player behaviour
The learned parameters and outputs of the CDHMM provide detailed, time-resolved insights into team
defensive behavior during corner sequences, including team-specific zonal configurations and per-frame
marking assignments. These outputs are leveraged to derive a set of player-level metrics that characterize
individual roles and behaviors within corner routines.

Context-Aware Man-Marking Attention
In their work in basketball analysis Franks et al.[31] introduce man-marking attention and defensive entropy,
                                     (p)
defining man-marking attention, Ak , as a metric associated with each attacking player k that is calculated
as the total number of frames the attacker k is marked divided by the sequence length Tp , while defensive
entropy captures how frequently teams assign multiple defenders to a single attacker. In a similar approach,
we adapt the man-marking attention metric to account for the possibility of zonal defending during the
corner sequences.
     To account for the possibility that defenders may be zonally marking, we define the context-aware
man-marking attention score, CAk , which measures how much more (or less) attention attacker k receives
compared to what the defending team typically awards to each attacker. This normalizes attention relative
to the team’s own mixture of zonal and man-marking, helping distinguish attackers who consistently draw
disproportionate attention across varying defensive schemes.
          (p)
     Let Ak denote the attention received by attacker k in corner sequence p, defined as the average number
of defenders assigned to mark them per frame over the course of the sequence. Let Pk be the set of all corner
sequences in which attacker k appears, and let w(p) denote the defending team in sequence p. For each team
w, we compute their baseline attention, Āw , as the average attention they assign to marked attackers across
all sequences they defend:                                              
                                             1     X
                                                         1
                                                                X    (p)
                                    Āw =                          Aℓ  ,
                                           |Pw |          |Ap |
                                                    p∈Pw           ℓ∈Ap




                                                           9
where Pw is the set of sequences defended by team w, and Ap is the set of attackers in sequence p.
   The deviation from this baseline for attacker k in sequence p is then defined as
                                                (p)       (p)
                                            CAk = Ak − Āw(p) ,

and the final context-aware attention score is the average of this difference across all sequences involving
attacker k.

Attacker Evasiveness
To assess the evasiveness of attackers making runs into the box during corners, we define an attacker evasion
score, ES(k), which quantifies how much space attacker k gains on their closest marker between the moment
he is first man-marked and the moment of first contact with the ball. The score is weighted by how close to
goal this separation occurs, attempting to reward the value of creating separation in dangerous areas. The
per-sequence scores, ESp (k), is defined as:

                                          ESp (k) = ϕgoal (tc ) · ∆dp,k .

Here ∆dp,k = dmin (tc ) − dmin (t0 ) is the change in the minimum Euclidean distance between the attacker
and their marker from the first marking frame (t0 ) to the first contact with the ball (tc ). The spatial weighting
term, ϕgoal (tc ) is a function of the attacker’s distance to goal, ensuring that space gain closer to the goal is
valued more highly.

                                                       min(18 yd, dgoal k (tc ))
                                   ϕgoal (tc ) = 1 −                             .
                                                               18 yd

Interpreting Attacker Profiles
We visualize the relationship between context-aware man-marking attention and attacker Separation Score
in Figure 6 for players who appeared in at least 20 corner sequences. Each point represents an individual
player, positioned by their average scores for each metric. The color of each point denotes the player’s
proximity to the ball at the moment of first contact, with warmer tones indicating those who operate closer
to the delivery location. This analysis enables practitioners to quickly identify different types of attacking
threats:

   • Top-right quadrant: Players with high separation score and high context-aware man-marking
     attention. These are high-priority threats who are both tightly marked and effective at creating
     space.

   • Bottom-left quadrant: Players who are neither tightly marked nor successful at creating space.
     This suggests they are either not perceived as a primary threat or are not centrally involved in the
     attacking scheme for this type of set piece.

   • Top-left quadrant: Players who consistently draw less attention and evade those who do mark
     them.

   • Bottom-right quadrant: Players who are often tightly marked and struggle to create space from
     their marker.




                                                         10
Figure 6: Relationship between attacker evasiveness and context-aware attention during corner kicks in the 2023/24
English Premier League season. Each point represents an individual attacking player who has appeared in at least
20 corner sequences, positioned by their average context-aware attention score (x-axis) and evasion score (y-axis).
Colour indicates the player’s first contact proximity, capturing how frequently they operated close to ball delivery
location, with warmer tones indicating higher proximity. Players in the top-right quadrant receive above-average
defensive attention and create above-average separation from their markers, while those in the bottom-left are less
tightly marked and generate limited separation. The remaining quadrants distinguish players who either evade well
despite receiving little attention (top-left), or who are marked closely but struggle to create space (bottom-right).




                                                         11
Effective Number of Initial Man-Marking Assignments
To assess the diversity of initial man-marking assignments for each defender, we define the effective number
of attackers per game, which quantifies how many distinct attackers a defender typically begins marking in
a given match. This is calculated by first computing the entropy [32] of a defender’s initial assignments per
game, converting it into an effective count of attackers, and then averaging across matches.
                            (g)
    For each game g, let Cj,k denote the number of corner sequences in which defender j begins by marking
                      (g)     P (g)
attacker k, and let Tj = k Cj,k be the total number of initial man-marking assignments observed for
defender j in that game. The empirical assignment distribution is
                                                        (g)
                                                 (g)  Cj,k
                                                pj,k = (g) ,
                                                      Tj

and the corresponding assignment entropy is given by
                                        (g)
                                                 X (g)         (g)
                                      Hj = −         pj,k log pj,k .
                                                     k

This entropy is converted to an effective number of attackers,
                                                                
                                            eff,(g)          (g)
                                           Nj       = exp Hj       ,

which reflects the number of attackers a defender would need to mark uniformly to obtain the same entropy
value. The effective number of attackers not only counts how many different opponents a defender ever
marks, but also weights them by how evenly that defender’s assignments are distributed. For example, a
defender who splits his attention equally between two attackers will have a higher value (≈ 2) than one who
marks one almost exclusively and the other only once (≈ 1.1), even though both have a unique-count of 2.
The final metric is obtained by averaging across all games in which the defender has at least one observed
initial man-marking assignment. Lower values of Njeff indicate defenders with consistent initial roles across
games, while higher values reflect more varied or flexible marking responsibilities.

Switch Rate
To measure how often defenders change their man-marking responsibilities, we define the Switch Rate. For
each defender in a corner sequence, we count the number of times their man-marking assignment changes
from one frame to the next. We then divide this count by the total number of frames in the sequence (minus
one) to get a per-sequence rate. The final Switch Rate is the average of these per-sequence rates across all
corners in which a defender appears, yielding an overall measure that reflects how frequently they transfer
between marking different attackers.

Interpreting Defender Profiles
Figure 7 visualises defender behaviour during corner kicks by plotting the average switch rate against the
effective number of inital attackers marked. The effective number of initial attackers captures the variety
of initial man-marking assignments a defender receives across games, while the switch rate reflects how
often that defender changes assignments within individual sequences. Each point represents a defender
who appeared in at least 20 corner routines, and colour denotes their average proximity to the point of first
contact, with warmer tones indicating players more frequently located near the delivery zone.



                                                      12
   • Top-right quadrant: Defenders who frequently switch assignments and mark a wide variety of
     attackers. These players may be tasked with flexible or reactive defensive roles.

   • Bottom-left quadrant: Defenders with a lower effective number of initial assignments and a low
     switch rate, suggesting a more specialized or rigid role.

   • Top-left quadrant: Defenders who mark a narrow range of attackers but exhibit high within-
     sequence switching, which may reflect reactive coverage or difficulty in maintaining individual
     matchups.

   • Bottom-right quadrant: Defenders who are assigned to a wide variety of attackers but maintain
     low within-sequence switching, suggesting their role is to take an initial assignment and maintain
     it.




Figure 7: Relationship between defender switch rate and effective number of initial attackers marked, based on data
from the 2023/24 English Premier League season. Each point represents a defender who appeared in at least 20 corner
sequences, positioned by their average number of distinct attackers marked at the start of corners (x-axis) and their
average rate of switching man-marking assignments within sequences (y-axis). Colour denotes the defender’s average
proximity to the point of first contact, with warmer tones indicating closer positioning. Defenders in the top-right
quadrant both frequently switch marking assignments and are assigned to a diverse set of attackers initially, while
those in the bottom-left exhibit more stable, specialised marking roles.



Human Analyst Baseline
To contextualise model performance on corner recipient prediction, we first measured how accurately expert
practitioners could anticipate the first-contact recipient from the information available at delivery. Eight
football analysts from Nottingham Forest FC (first team and academy staff) were shown a sample of 30

                                                         13
corner routines from our validation set. Each routine was presented as a single image depicting player
positions and velocity vectors at the moment of delivery, with teams distinguished by colour and the corner
taker highlighted. Participants were instructed to nominate the three players they believed most likely to win
first contact.
     Across all participants, mean top-3 accuracy was 23.75% ± 4.52% (mean ± standard deviation). This
illustrates the inherent difficulty of the task when judged from the delivery snapshot alone, providing a
practical reference point for interpreting model performance.

Corner Recipient Prediction
We compare two graph neural network (GNN) models for predicting which player will next interact with the
ball (the first-contact recipient), given a graph representation of the game at the moment of corner delivery.
The first model takes canonicalised graphs as inputs, with MLP [33, 34] pre- and post-processing layers and
four intermediate GATv2 [35, 36] layers. The second model is a reimplementation of TacticAI’s receiver
prediction component, which employs four D2 -equivariant GATv2 layers. We evaluate model performance
under varying training set sizes corresponding to 50%, 75%, and 100% of available tracking data (roughly
2, 3, and 4 seasons). In each regime, we retain a fixed 20% test set and split the remainder into training and
validation subsets (80/20), subsampling the training set to the target fraction. We report top-3 accuracy in
all experiments, following the evaluation protocol used in [27]. All models are implemented in PyTorch and
trained using the Adam optimizer with early stopping based on validation top-3 accuracy.
     At the full dataset size (100%), the canonicalised model achieved significantly higher average top-3
accuracy (48.07%) than TacticAI (47.43%; paired t-test p = 0.0088). Expressed relative to expert human
performance on the same task, these correspond to 202% (canonicalised) and 200% (TacticAI) of the hu-
man baseline top-3 accuracy. At reduced dataset sizes, differences between models were smaller and not
statistically significant (75%: canonicalised 47.00%, TacticAI 46.71%, p = 0.0740; 50%: canonicalised
44.81%, TacticAI 45.22%, p = 0.2472). Relative to the human baseline, these correspond to 198% vs 197%
(75%) and 189% vs 190% (50%), respectively. Thus, while canonicalisation shows a marginal but statisti-
cally significant advantage at full data, performance converges as training data decreases. Notably, despite
our models achieving lower headline accuracy than reported in the original TacticAI paper, both models
substantially outperform expert human raters on this delivery-time snapshot task.

Evaluation Of Off-ball Defensive Contributions
Defensive Value Added
To evaluate the efficacy of defensive positioning at the moment of delivery t, we compare the reception
risk implied by a defender’s observed location to the risk achievable under counterfactual man-marking
assignments generated by the CDHMM. Let atk denote attacker k at time t and dtj denote defender j at
time t. We use a reception model to estimate the probability that attacker k receives first contact at delivery
given defender j’s position, written Pr (atk | dtj ).
    The CDHMM provides a distribution over counterfactual defender positions x induced by assigning
defender j to a particular man-marking role k ′ (i.e., “mark attacker k ′ ”), which we denote p(x | k ′ ). Under
such a role, the expected total reception probability conceded to the feasible attacker set Kjt is
                                                                   
                                                   X
                                          Ex|k′        Pr (atk | x) ,
                                                 k∈Kjt

where Kjt is the set of feasible man-marking roles for defender j at time t (equivalently, the attackers
considered relevant/threatening for that defender in that frame). We define the Group Coverage Advantage

                                                      14
(GCA) as the gap between (i) the minimum expected group reception probability achievable across feasible
counterfactual roles and (ii) the group reception probability implied by the defender’s observed position:
                                                                
                                                X                    X
                     GCAtj = min   ′
                                       E x|k ′     P r (atk | x)−        Pr (atk | dtj ).               (1)
                                k ∈Kjt
                                             k∈Kjt                  k∈Kjt

    If GCAtj > 0 this means that event the best counterfactual man-marking option concedes more than
the defender actually conceded, so the defender’s real positioning was better than any of the feasible man-
marking alternatives. By benchmarking against a set of optimal counterfactuals rather than raw reception
probabilities, this framework offers several key advantages:

  • Isolation: It disentangles the defender’s contribution from confounding variables such as passer
    pressure or the inherent difficulty of the pass, which are held constant across both real and ghost
    scenarios.

  • Contextual Baselines: The ”optimal” ghost is calculated specifically within the defender’s feasi-
    ble set K, which is itself conditioned on the collective defensive structure, accounting for decision
    making relative to teammate’s positions and roles.

    Figure 8 shows the majority of actions align with the y = x identity line, suggesting the CDHMM ef-
fectively captures standard marking behavior. The ”Value Added” region (green) identifies instances where
real positioning outperforms the optimal man-marking choice, while the red region serves as a diagnostic
tool for defensive underperformance relative to a feasible marking role.

Case Studies
The utility of the Group Coverage Advantage (GCA) metric is illustrated through case studies involving
varying degrees of attacker complexity (|K|). By comparing simple man-marking (|K| = 1) with complex
multi-attacker scenarios (|K| ≥ 2), we can visualize how defenders prioritize threats. In Figure 9 A (|K| =
1), the defender positions themselves relative to a single attacker. The GCA here measures the difference
in reception probability for that attacker compared to an ”average” marking position, calculated via Monte
Carlo sampling (see the point cloud); a negative GCA indicates a defensive lapse where the defender is
positioned negatively compared to the optimal man-marking role. Interestingly we see that the model values
the defender’s positioning despite him not executing a man-marking style of positioning relative to the
attacker, showing that given the other defender’s positions the defender we are focusing on makes a good
decision to position themselves like they do, potentially because they would provide limited value in an
area already overloaded by defenders, but by positioning themselves like they do they limit shorter or more
front post contact likelihood. Figure 9 B demonstrates a more complex scenario where the defender could
choose between |K| = 2 feasible attackers. Here, GCA is benchmarked against the ”Optimal Ghost”
man-marking assignment that would minimize the total group reception probability. By highlighting the
specific attacker that the GCA is benchmarked against, we demonstrate the model’s ability to identify which
threat the defender should have prioritized. In this particular case the model indicates that the defender
would reduce the oppositions reception probability most by stepping out from his teammates and towards
the optimal attacker who has been left free near the penalty spot. Such examples show that elite defensive
value can stem from the ability to ”split” the difference between multiple threats or correctly identify the
most likely recipient in high-entropy situations.




                                                     15
Figure 8: Observed vs. Optimal Ghost Reception Probability. The scatter plot compares observed defensive position-
ing against CDHMM-generated counterfactual ”ghosts”. For each defender, a set of feasible attackers K is identified
based on the CDHMM’s expected state occupancy. We calculate the total reception probability for the group K given
the observed game state and compare it against the expected outcome if the defender had assumed the optimal man-
marking role within that set, determined via Monte Carlo sampling. Points falling below the identity line indicate
”Value Added,” where the defender’s actual positioning suppresses reception probability more effectively than the
best average man-marking baseline. Conversely, points above the line signify defensive underperformance relative to
the counterfactual baseline.




                                                        16
           (a) Single-threat scenario (|K| = 1).               (b) Multi-threat scenario (|K| = 2) with optimal target identi-
                                                               fication.

Figure 9: Spatial Case Studies of GCA. (A) Demonstrates a defender outperforming the ghost baseline by occupying
a strategically advantageous zone rather than tight man-marking. (B) Illustrates threat prioritization in an overload;
the yellow attacker represents the ’Optimal’ target used to calculate the GCA baseline. Real positions are shown in
deep blue (defenders) and deep red (attackers), with the counterfactual ghost distribution represented by the grey point
cloud.


Emergent Defensive Behaviors: Overloads and Delivery Types
To evaluate the impact of delivery trajectory on defensive quality, we analyzed standardized effect sizes
(Cohen’s d) alongside the Kolmogorov-Smirnov (KS) and Mann-Whitney U (MWU) tests. Across all |K| ≤
4, Cohen’s d remained below 0.11, demonstrating that the practical difference in average Group Coverage
Advantage (GCA) between inswinging and outswinging deliveries is negligible. This suggests that ball
trajectory does not fundamentally bias a defender’s average positioning efficacy. However, the discrepancy
between the MWU and KS test results reveals a shift in defensive consistency. While the MWU test detects
a statistically significant but practically minor shift in medians, the KS test yields significantly more extreme
p-values (pKS = 1.24 × 10−43 vs. pM W U = 8.96 × 10−17 for |K| = 1). This indicates that the primary
effect of delivery type is not on average performance, but on the shape and volatility of the distribution of
GCA observed. Specifically, outswinging deliveries appear to create higher-entropy situations, resulting in a
wider variance of GCA values—characterized by more frequent elite positioning and more severe defensive
lapses—even while average suppression remains stable. This volatility is further amplified by situational
complexity. As shown in Figure 10, the standard deviation of GCA expands as the number of feasible
attackers |K| increases. High-complexity ’overload’ scenarios thus provide greater opportunities for both
high-value defensive interventions and severe failures when seeking to minimise reception probabilities.




                                                          17
Figure 10: Impact of Situational Complexity and Delivery Type on Defensive Performance. Group Coverage Advan-
tage (GCA) is plotted as a function of the number of feasible attackers (|K|) for both inswinging (top) and outswinging
(bottom) deliveries. As situational complexity increases (|K| = 1 to |K| = 5), there is a expansion in the variance and
interquartile range of GCA, indicating higher defensive volatility in overload scenarios. While delivery type results
in statistically distinct distributional shapes (verified via KS tests), the negligible shift in medians (Cohen’s d < 0.11)
suggests that the density of the attacking group, rather than ball trajectory, is the primary driver of GCA volatility.


Discussion
CDHMM Outputs and Limitations
The CDHMM framework presented in this paper enables interpretable, unsupervised analysis of defensive
behaviour during corner kicks, uncovering temporally resolved man-marking and zonal assignments. The
inferred state sequences, emission distributions, and transition dynamics reflect tactical strategies and also
facilitate downstream player-level characterisation. Unlike prior approaches that rely on manually labeled
data to identify tactical roles or marking assignments [25, 26], our unsupervised CDHMM infers these
directly from the tracking data. This label-free approach makes the framework scalable and applicable
to new teams or scenarios without the need for time-intensive manual annotation. Combined with outcome
prediction models such as pass or reception prediction, it facilitates sophisticated analysis of team strategies,
and through counterfactual analysis extends the capability of these predictive models to be able to evalulate
off-ball defensive contributions. In this section, we reflect on key findings from the model outputs, discuss
limitations of the current formulation, and outline directions for future work.
    Our analysis of inferred zonal structures revealed systematic differences in spatial organisation between
inswinging and outswinging deliveries. For instance, zones estimated for inswinging corners tended to
cluster around the near post and six-yard box, while outswinging zones were more dispersed, often extending
toward the edge of the penalty area. These patterns are consistent with coaching intuition and tactical
adaptations to ball trajectory and delivery type, and suggest that the model captures context-dependent
spatial roles without the need for manual annotation.
    The distribution of learned transition parameters further supports this interpretation. While self-transition
weights for man-marking states were relatively stable across teams and delivery types, parameters governing
zonal persistence exhibited greater variability. This highlights zonal marking strategies are more context-


                                                            18
sensitive and reflect team-specific defensive schemes. The CDHMM thus captures not just generic defensive
tendencies but also nuanced adaptations based on delivery type and team setup.
     When we examined player-level behavioural metrics derived from the latent state sequences—such as
switch rate and the effective number of initial assignments—we found systematic variation across defenders.
Interestingly, defenders appearing in the bottom-right quadrant of Figure 7 were frequently identified as
zonal players when discussing model outputs with coaches and analysts. This suggests that zonal defenders
tend to begin sequences assigned to a zonal state, and then encounter a variety of attacking opponents across
games who enter their zones, but rarely switch assignments within sequences. This likely reflects a stable
zone responsibility: attackers enter their area, drawing a transition to man-marking, but once that switch
occurs, the assignment typically persists. In contrast, defenders with high switch rates and varied initial
assignments appear to take on more reactive or flexible roles. These metrics help distinguish defenders with
tightly bounded marking roles from those involved in more complex or adaptive duties.
     Despite the interpretability and domain alignment of our CDHMM framework, several limitations re-
main. First, the model does not currently include an “uninvolved” state to account for defenders who are
neither zonal nor actively man-marking. In some sequences where a defender is positioned well away from
the active play, or do not consistently adopt a similar team level zonal position, this can lead to forced
assignments that do not match intuitive roles. Second, the duration of time spent in each hidden state is
implicitly governed by geometric distributions due to the standard HMM formulation. This may underesti-
mate longer-term stability in assignments. Third, the CDHMM does not utilise observed player velocities
in its emission distribution formulation, extending the model to do so could potentially improve the mod-
els ability to detect zonal and man-marking behaviours. Regarding our emission model, the man-marking
formulation is tailored for set-piece behaviour and may not generalise well to open play, where player move-
ments are more variable and player’s reference frames for positioning are less stable. Similarly, the zonal
emission distributions would require revision, as zones in open play are more dynamic and often defined by
relative positioning to teammates rather than static locations adopted at the start of a sequence. Assuming
zonal distributions are Gaussian imposes symmetry around the zone mean, which may not hold in practice.
For example, defenders may consistently bias their positioning toward the goal or corner spot, resulting in
skewed distributions that the model cannot capture.

Off-ball Contribution Analysis
To our knowledge, this work represents the first attempt in football to generate counterfactual representa-
tions of play that are explicitly conditioned on interpretable defensive behaviours. By modelling who is
marking whom—and how these assignments evolve over time—we enable tactical diagnosis and support
simulations that ”ghost” alternative defensive structures. These counterfactuals can be passed through out-
come prediction models, allowing us to investigate the effect of individual defenders on predicted outcomes
such as receptions or expected threat. This enables new methods for quantifying off-ball contributions,
either by comparing a defender’s observed behaviour to plausible alternatives or by generating defender-
specific weights for credit assignment. It is important to note that our evaluation does not compare each
defender to an optimal positioning policy that globally minimises opponent threat. Instead, we assess their
contribution relative to a counterfactual in which they strictly mark each attacker within a plausible spatial
neighbourhood. More complex comparisons could be facilitated in future work using grid searches over de-
fender positions and velocities, or by employing reinforcement learning agents trained to suppress opponent
threat—an approach analogous to recent work comparing passing decisions to those made by learned agents
[37].




                                                     19
HMM Future Work
Future work will expand this framework into open play analysis. While set pieces offer structure and re-
peatability, many of the underlying questions—who is responsible for preventing progress, how defenders
adapt to off-ball movement—are equally relevant in dynamic play. Overall, the CDHMM provides a novel,
interpretable approach to understanding team and individual defensive behaviours from tracking data, and
lays the foundation for further integration of unsupervised behavioural models with predictive analytics in
football.

Reception Prediction Models
Our first recipient prediction models achieve top-3 accuracies between 44–48%, this compares favourably
to a baseline accuracy of 23.75% obtained from expert analysts using static tracking data visualisations,
highlighting both the difficulty of the task and the value of predictive modelling in supporting decision-
making under uncertainty.
     The marginally superior performance of the canonicalised model over the D2 -equivariant TacticAI
model, particularly at full dataset size, suggests that the assumptions underlying equivariance to D2 symme-
tries may not hold perfectly in the football corner-kick prediction scenarios. Football set pieces, such as cor-
ner kicks, inherently exhibit asymmetries due to teams frequently assign predominantly left or right-footed
players to take corners on particular sides of the pitch. Because there is a higher fraction of players who are
predominantly right-footed compared to left-footed this may break the assumption of perfect mirror sym-
metry that D2 -equivariant architectures exploit. Consequently, enforcing equivariance may unintentionally
restrict the representational capacity or flexibility of the model, potentially limiting its predictive accuracy.
     The improved performance of the canonicalised model at full dataset size might be attributable to its in-
creased modeling capacity, provided by additional MLP preprocessing layers. These layers could facilitate
learning more expressive representations beyond symmetry constraints. However, this benefit diminishes
with reduced dataset sizes, as indicated by the lack of statistical significance at 75% and 50% data condi-
tions, suggesting that the additional capacity may not be fully utilized or could even lead to mild overfitting
when fewer training samples are available. In scenarios with limited data, the TacticAI model’s equivariant
constraints could potentially offer regularisation benefits, preventing overfitting. However, our results do
not clearly support this hypothesis, as we observed no significant performance advantage for the equivariant
model at smaller dataset sizes.

Limitations and Dataset Differences
While our reimplementation of TacticAI’s receiver prediction model achieves top-3 accuracy of approx-
imately 47%, the original paper reports values closer to 75%. Our implementation closely follows the
released code and uses the same architecture and D2 -equivariant GNN layer formulation. Although both
models operate on Premier League tracking data the datasets are not strictly identical. In particular, the
process by which corner sequences are extracted and aligned to ball delivery events may differ. Clubs
often maintain proprietary event alignment pipelines, and discrepancies in how “moment of delivery” is
defined could result in subtle but important task differences. For example, if our sequences consistently
begin earlier relative to the actual ball contact, our models may face a more difficult prediction task. To
investigate this, we visually inspected hundreds of our aligned sequences alongside game video and found
no evidence of systematic misalignment. Our event alignment appears well-behaved, though differences in
annotation protocols remain a plausible explanation for the performance gap. Consequently, while our Tacti-
cAI reimplementation is faithful at the architectural level, our results should be interpreted as a comparative
benchmark rather than a direct replication of the original.



                                                       20
Methods
CDHMM Definitions
We utilize an CDHMM, an extension the standard HMM [28], where transition probabilities vary with
time-varying covariates. For each team and delivery type, we model a defender j ∈ {1, .., J} with N =
K + 1 latent behavioral states, where J is the number of outfield defenders and K is the number of outfield
attackers. The hidden states st ∈ S = {q1 , . . . , qK , qN } represent man-marking an attacker k and defending
an assigned zone, respectively. We set J = K = 10. Each defender is treated independently, except during
initial zone assignments.
     The model defines z ∈ {1, ..., 10} for each team and delivery type. If defender j is in the zonal state,
st = qN , their position, Dt,j at time t is governed by an emission distribution specific to their assigned zone:

                                              Dt,j ∼ N (µz , Σz ),

where µz and Σz are the mean and covariance of zone z. At the start of a sequence (t = 0), defenders are
uniquely assigned to zones by solving a linear sum assignment problem using the Kuhn-Munkres algorithm
[38, 39] to minimize the sum of Euclidean distances between each defender’s position and an assigned
zone’s mean:
                             K X
                             X K                                   X                 X
                    min                ∥D0,j − µz ∥1 Xj,z   s.t.         Xj,z = 1,       Xj,z = 1.
                X∈{0,1}K×K
                             j=1 z=1                                 z               j

    To model man-marking behavior, we divide the pitch into fixed 3 m × 3 m spatial bins, indexed by l.
Although Premier League pitch sizes vary slightly, penalty box dimensions are standardized; we therefore
define bins with fixed physical dimensions to ensure consistency in the regions surrounding the penalty
                                                                    (l)   (l)
area. For each bin l, we define a unique parameter vector Γ(l) = [γo , γg ] and variance σ 2(l) , subject to the
            (l)     (l)
constraint γo + γg = 1. This parameterization ensures the defender’s expected position lies on the line
connecting their assigned attacker and the center of the goal. Given that defender j is in state st = qk , i.e.,
marking attacker k, and attacker k’s position Ot,k lies within bin l, the defender’s position Dt,j is modeled
as
                                      (l)                    (l)
                         Dt,j ∼ N (µt,k , σ 2(l) ), where µt,k = γo(l) Ot,k + γg(l) G,
                                                                                              (l)    (l)
and G denotes the center of the defending team’s goal line. The bin-specific weights, γo and γg , control
how tightly a defender marks their opponent, reflecting the positional strategy in that area of the pitch.
    Our transition model defines four types of transitions a defender can make between consecutive frames:
a man-marking self-transition, a man-marking switch, a zonal self-transition, or a zonal-to-man transition.
Based on tactical guidance from coaches and analysts, we prohibit transitions from man-marking to zonal
defending.
    We parameterize these transitions using logistic and softmax functions over covariate vectors. Sepa-
rate covariate vectors and weight parameters are defined for man-marking self-transitions (βm ) and zonal
self-transitions (βz ). Transitions involving a switch between states—either between two attackers or from
zonal marking to man-marking—share a single covariate vector and a weight vector (βs ). This shared pa-
rameterization reflects the conceptual similarity between these switching behaviors and is also statistically
motivated, as such transitions occur relatively infrequently and pooling them improves estimation stability.
    The probabilities for each transition are defined as follows:
                                                                                             (m,k)
    • Continuing to man-mark k: This is modeled with a sigmoid function, where Xt−1,j is the covariate
      vector.                                                     
                                                           ⊤ (m,k)
                         P (st,j = qk | st−1,j = qk ) = σ βm Xt−1,j ≡ pm,j,k ,

                                                       21
                                                  ps (st = q2 |st−1 = q1 )

                      pm (st = q1 )          q1                              q2          pm (st = q2 )

                                                  ps (st = q1 |st−1 = q2 )


                  ps (st = q1 |st−1 = q3 )                                        ps (st = q2 |st−1 = q3 )

                                                            q3


                                                            pz

Figure 11: A simplified Markov chain diagram with three states illustrating transition probabilities. This represents
the Markov chain for an individual defender in the case where there are only two outfield players (K = 2) that the
defender can mark. States q1 and q2 are man-marking states and q3 is a zonal state.


    • Switching from attacker k ′ to attacker k (k ̸= k ′ ): This probability is proportional to the likelihood
      of not continuing to man-mark k, with probability mass being distributed amongst other attackers via
      a softmax function.
                                                                                       
                                                                                  (s,k)
                                                                       exp βs⊤ Xt−1,j
          P (st,j = qk | st−1,j = qk′ , k ̸= k ′ ) = 1 − pm,j,k′ · P                         ≡ ps,j (k ′ , k).
                                                                
                                                                              
                                                                                  ⊤   (s,ℓ)
                                                                     ℓ̸=k′ exp βs Xt−1,j


    • Transitioning from man-marking to zonal defending: This transition is disallowed.

                               P (st,j = qN | st−1,j = qk ) = 0        for all k ∈ {1, ..., K}.

                                                                                                             (z)
    • Remaining in the zonal state: This is also modeled with a sigmoid function, where Xt−1,j is the
      covariate vector.                                              
                                                                  (z)
                          P (st,j = qN | st−1,j = qN ) = σ βz⊤ Xt−1,j ≡ pz,j .

    • Transitioning from zonal to man-marking attacker k: This probability is conditioned on not re-
      maining in the zonal state.
                                                                               
                                                                          (s,k)
                                                               exp βs⊤ Xt−1,j
               P (st,j = qk | st−1,j = qN ) = (1 − pz,j ) · P                       ≡ ps,j (N, k).
                                                              K
                                                                  exp   β ⊤ X (s,ℓ)
                                                              ℓ=1        s    t−1,j


Covariate Design and Feature Scaling
All covariate vectors are standardized (zero mean, unit variance) across the dataset to ensure consistent
scaling. These vectors are designed to capture a range of dynamic and physical factors that influence a
defender’s tactical decisions. To quantify whether a defender-attacker pair is approaching or moving apart,
we use a convergence metric, included in the covariates for man-marking and switching states:

                                                         (vt,k − vt,j )⊤ (pt,k − pt,j )
                                Convergencet,j,k =                                      ,                          (2)
                                                              ∥pt,k − pt,j ∥ + ε

                                                            22
where pt,j and vt,j are the position and velocity of defender j at time t, and ε is a small constant for
numerical stability.
    To capture lateral movement, we define the tangential relative velocity as the magnitude of the com-
ponent of relative velocity that is orthogonal to the defender-attacker line. This metric helps distinguish
lock-step marking from situations where an attacker is ”slipping past” the defender:

             ⊥                                                                                  pt,k − pt,j
            vt,j,k = ∥(vt,k − vt,j ) − [(vt,k − vt,j ) · r̂t,j,k ] r̂t,j,k ∥ ,   r̂t,j,k =                      .    (3)
                                                                                             ∥pt,k − pt,j ∥ + ε
    We also include the heading alignment, defined as the cosine of the angle between defender and attacker
velocity vectors:
                                                                  ⊤v
                                                                vt,j  t,k
                                            cos θt,j,k =                       .                                     (4)
                                                           ∥vt,j ∥ ∥vt,k ∥ + ε
                               (z)
    The covariate vector Xt,j only contains the convergence metric because zones are stationary. Addi-
tionally, we use player heights and weights to capture physical mismatches. For zonal defending, we use
Mahalanobis distance to account for spatial uncertainty, as the size and shape of team zones vary. All
covariates are summarized in Table 1.
                  Table 1: Feature composition of covariate vectors used in the transition models.

  Covariate Vector        Features                                                  Related Transitions
    (m,k)
  Xt,j                    1 (bias term), distance from defender to at-              Defender j continues to man-
                          tacker, inverse distance to attacker, tangential          mark attacker k
                          relative velocity, heading alignment, conver-
                          gence metric, attacker height, attacker weight
    (z)
  Xt,j                    1 (bias term), Mahalanobis distance to as-                Defender j continues to defend
                          signed zone, inverse Mahalanobis distance,                zonally
                          defender velocity toward zone, defender
                          height, defender weight
    (s,k)
  Xt,j                    1 (bias term), distance to attacker, inverse              Defender j switches to man-
                          distance, tangential relative velocity, head-             mark attacker k not previously
                          ing alignment, convergence metric, attacker               assigned at t − 1
                          height, attacker weight



CDHMM Training
Model parameters, θ = {Γ, σ 2 , µz , σz2 , βm , βz , βs }, are estimated using an expectation maximisation ap-
proach as outlined in algorithm 1. All results are based on training a batch of 10 models per team and
delivery type, each for 15 fixed iterations. For each batch, the model with the highest total observation
likelihood was selected. We denote the set of P observation sequences as O = [O(1) , ..., O(P) ] where
            (p)     (p)
O(p) = [O1 , ..., OTp ]. Here, O(p) represents the sequence of tracking data for an individual corner kick
sequence p, which consists of Tp frames. In the EM algorithm we alternate between computing the posterior
expected transition counts ξt (i, j) = P st = i, st+1 = j | O, θ) and expected state occupancy counts
γt (i) = P (st = i | O, θ) using the Forward-Backward algorithm [28] (E-step), and then maximizing the
expected complete-data log-likelihood (M-step).


                                                             23
    First, K zone locations are randomly initialized by sampling from a uniform distribution along the six-
yard line in the y-direction and extending five meters on either side of the six-yard line in the x-direction.
Each zone is initialised with a covariance σz2 = 2I, where I represents the identity matrix. The param-
eters Γ(l) are initialized as [0.8, 0.2] for each bin l. All beta weights are randomly initialised by drawing
random values from a normal distribution with zero mean and a standard deviation of 0.1. All initial state
probabilities are uniformly set to 1/K, ensuring that each state has an equal probability at the start.
    Treating each defender independently, expected state occupancy and transition counts are calculated us-
ing the Forward-Backward algorithm. The observation likelihood of an individual defender in the sequence
p, Lpj = P (O(p) |λ, j), is calculated using the forward-backward algorithm. The complete observation log
likelihood is therefore                          X
                                                     log αj,Tp (n),
                                                p,j,n

where αj,Tp (n) is the forward probability at time Tp for defender j whilst they occupy state n in corner
sequence p. For each team K zonal locations are estimated, each zone position µz is estimated via
                                                  PP      1
                                                     p=0 Lpj D0j γ0jN
                                          µˆz =      PP     1
                                                                      ,
                                                       p=0 Lpj γ0jN

where D0j is the position of defender j who is assigned to the zone at time t = 0. γ0jN is the expected state
occupancy of defender j occupying their assigned zonal state at time t = 0 in corner sequence p. The zonal
distribution has covariance which is estimated using
                                     PP    1 PTp                                ⊤
                                      p=0 Lpj t=0 γtjN (Dtj − µˆz )(Dtj − µˆz )
                            σˆz2 =                                                .
                                              PP     1 PTp
                                                p=0 Lpj   t=0 γtjN


To estimate Γ(l) and σ 2(l) for each bin l, we define the design matrix Z(l) as follows:
                                                      M
                                           Z(l) =            [Otk , G],
                                                    k∈Attackers
                                                   dist(k,l)≤NH
        L
where       denotes the concatenation operation, Otk represents the position of attacker k that the defender is
marking at time t, and G is the goal position. The matrix includes entries for attacker k who is positioned
in bin l or in any neighbouring bin within NH hops of bin l. In this analysis, we set the parameter NH equal
to one so only immediate neighbours are included. Any player whose position falls outside the defined bins
is included in the nearest possible bin. With our modified design matrix, in the M-step we update Γ(l) and
σ 2(l) as outlined by Franks et al.,

                                                           X γtjk                         (l)
                            (Γ̂(l) , σ̂ 2(l) ) ← arg max                    (Dtj − Γ(l) Ztk )2 ,
                                              Γ(l) ,σ 2(l) t,j,k   σ 2(l)

     where γtjk is the expected state occupancy for defender j occupying man-marking hidden state k at time
t. Initial state probabilities for each defender are updated using the expected state occupancy values γ0jn .
     In a HMM, the complete-data log-likelihood Q (the log of the joint probability of the hidden state
sequence and the observed data) decomposes into two independent terms, one involving the emission pa-
rameters and one involving the transition parameters. Consequently, in the M-step of the EM algorithm each
parameter set can be maximized separately, without affecting the other [28], such that


                                                           24
Algorithm 1 Algorithm for HMM Training
 1: Initialisation:
 2: Initialise zonal distributions
 3: Initialise all bin’s Γ(l)
 4: Initialise transition weights βm , βz , βs
 5: Initialise initial state distribution
 6: while not converged do
 7:   Expectation Step (E-step):
 8:   for each corner sequence Op in O = [O1 , . . . , OP ] do
 9:     Assign defending players to zones using the Hungarian algorithm.
10:     for each outfield defending player do
11:        Compute forward and backward probabilities using current HMM parameters
12:        Compute sequence observation likelihood Lpj
13:        Compute expected state occupancy and expected state transition counts
14:        Compute hidden state sequence using the Viterbi algorithm
15:     end for
16:   end for
17:   Maximization Step (M-step):
18:   Estimate new zone positions and covariances
19:   Update transition weights βm , βz , βs
20:   Update initial state distribution
21:   for each man-marking bin l do
22:     Estimate Γ(l) and σ 2(l)
23:   end for
24:   Check number of iterations or for convergence criteria
25: end while




                                         β (new) = arg max Q β | β (old) .
                                                                        
                                                              β

    Because we assume defenders act independently, the full expected complete-data log-likelihood fac-
torizes into a sum over defenders and time steps. Including l2 normalisation, an individual defender’s Q
function corresponding to transitions is
                                T −1 X
                                    (K                      K X
                                                              K
                                X                           X                                    
             Q(βm , βz , βs ) =          ξt (i, i) log pm +     ξt (i, l) log (1 − pm ) ps (i, l)
                                 t=1     i=1                         i=1 l=1
                                                                         l̸=i
                                                              K
                                                                                                           )
                                                              X                                              (5)
                                 + ξt (N, N ) log pz +               ξt (N, i) log (1 − pz ) ps (N, i)
                                                               i=1
                                                                                
                                     −   1
                                         2       λm ∥βm ∥ + λz ∥βz ∥2 + λs ∥βs ∥2 .
                                                         2


    By using the identity K
                            P
           PK                 l=1 ξt (i, l) = γti which follows from marginalizing over next states, we imme-
diately get l̸=i ξt (i, l) = γti − ξt (i, i). It then follows that the gradients of the Q–function are

                                         T −1 X
                                              K
                                         X                               (m,i)
                            ∇ βm Q =                   ξt (i, i) − γti pm Xt     − λm β m ,                    (6)
                                         t=1 i=1


                                                              25
                                           T −1
                                           X                            (z)
                              ∇βz Q =                ξt (N, N ) − γtN pz Xt − λz βz ,                      (7)
                                           t=1
                                     T −1 X
                                         (K K                            K
                                                                 h                          i
                                                                   (s,l)              (s,k)
                                     X      X                            X
                         ∇ βs Q =                       ξt (i, l) Xt −     ps (i, k) Xt
                                     t=1    i=1 l=1                      k=1
                                                l̸=i                     k̸=i                              (8)
                              K                       K
                                                                                  )
                                              h                          i
                                                (s,l)              (s,k)
                              X                       X
                          +          ξt (N, l) Xt −     ps (N, k) Xt                  − λs β s .
                               l=1                         k=1
    For each vector of transition weights β, we compute its gradient and then numerically minimize the
negative of our Q-function with respect to β using the limited-memory BFGS algorithm with bound con-
straints (L-BFGS-B), capping the procedure at 100 iterations and utilising normalisation penalties of λm =
100, λz = 100, λs = 1000.

Graph Neural Network Models
To predict which player will make first contact with the ball, we implemented two supervised graph neural
network (GNN) architectures. Both models operate on a static graph representation of the match state at
the moment of delivery. In this graph, all on-pitch players are represented as nodes in a fully connected,
undirected graph. Each node encodes individual player information, and edges represent the pairwise rela-
tionship of being on the same or opposing team.
    As detailed in Table 2, each node’s input features include seven attributes describing the player’s posi-
tion, velocity, physical characteristics, and role as the corner taker. Edges are encoded with a single binary
feature to indicate whether the connected players are teammates or opponents. We did not use any global
graph-level features.

                              Table 2: Graph input features for first-contact prediction.

                 Level     Feature                       Description
                 Node      x, y                          Player position (m) on standardised pitch
                           vx , vy                       Instantaneous velocity (m/s)
                           Height                        Player height (m)
                           Weight                        Player weight (kg)
                           Is corner taker bool          Boolean indicator
                 Edge      teammate bool                 1 if same team, else 0



Equivariant GNN Architecture: TacticAI-Inspired Model
The first architecture follows the design introduced by Wang et al. in the TacticAI system for corner kick
analysis [27]. It combines a GATv2-based message-passing architecture with equivariant group convolutions
to utilise the reflective symmetries as an inductive bias. The graph is first duplicated across four views
corresponding to the D2 symmetry group: the original layout, horizontal reflection, vertical reflection, and
both reflections. Each view is processed with group-equivariant layers and their embeddings are averaged to
obtain a reflection-invariant representation of shape 22 × 4. A final linear layer maps each node embedding
to a logit, and the model is trained using a weighted cross-entropy loss to address the class imbalance
                                                                                                     √
between the single contact-making player and the 21 non-contact players. We apply a weight of 21 to

                                                             26
the negative class. We performed a hyperparameter search across a range of values, including learning rate
{1×10−4 , 3×10−4 , 1×10−3 }, weight decay {1×10−4 , 1×10−3 , 2×10−3 }, and dropout: {0.1, 0.2, 0.4}.

Canonicalised MLP + GATv2 Model
We also implement a non-equivariant GNN model using canonicalised corner frames, in which all corners
are rotated and reflected to appear as if taken from the same pitch quadrant. Each node’s raw features
are first passed through a two-layer multilayer perceptron (MLP) to create a hidden representation. The
resulting embeddings are then processed by four standard (non-equivariant) GATv2 layers which use the
same number of attention heads (8) and the same per-head output dimension (4) as in the TacticAI-based
model. A second two-layer MLP maps the final embeddings to logits for 22-way classification and same
weighted cross-entropy loss and hyperparameter grid are used.

Evaluating Off-Ball Defensive Contributions through Counterfactual Analysis and Defensive
Credit Attribution
Off-Ball Pass Restriction
As a first demonstration of our framework’s utility, we define the Off-Ball Pass Restriction metric (OBPR),
which uses the expected state occupancy (γtjk ) from the CDHMM to allocate credit to individual defenders.
This metric rewards defenders for restricting the pass reception probability of attackers they are marking.
                                                X
                                    OBPRj =        γtjk · (1 − Pr (atk )) ,                               (9)
                                                  t,k

where Pr (·) is pass reception model, returning the player-level probability that a given player will be the
next to interact with the ball and atk is the observed position of attacker k at time t. This metric measures
how effectively a defender suppresses passing options across all possible marking assignments, with con-
tributions weighted according to their expected responsibility for each attacker. Similar metrics could be
defined by substituting Pr (·) with Pthreat (·), an expected threat model, returning the player-level probability
that the sequence of play results in a goal for the team conditioned on a player receiving a successful pass.
A more complete metric would use both such models jointly to appraise how defenders restrict passes to
highly threatening attackers.
    Despite awarding credit to individual defenders, this metric is limited in several ways. First, it does not
address defensive or offensive overloads—situations where multiple defenders contribute to suppressing the
same attacker, or where a defender’s positioning fails to restrict the most threatening of multiple nearby
attackers. Secondly, it does not incorporate any situation-specific baseline that accounts for confounding
effects, such as on-ball pressure affecting the passer (not the recipient) and the inherent difficulty of the pass
due to factors such as distance and angle. Third, it lacks a mechanism to isolate the individual defender’s
contribution from the joint effect of their teammates, making it difficult to disentangle shared defensive
credit. This means that a defender can accumulate credit for low reception probabilities that are actually
caused by external factors—such as the attacker being in an infeasible passing zone or the passer being
under pressure—rather than the defender’s own marking.
    To simplify overload effects, one could restrict OBPR to Viterbi-assigned marking pairs rather than us-
ing ESO-weighted sums. However, this still does not address confounding influences from teammates and
the game state. We also note that ESO is computed using the full observation sequence, which introduces
potential information leakage from future events. For analyses concerned with causal interpretation, us-
ing forward probabilities (i.e., probabilities conditioned only on past observations) is a more appropriate
approach.


                                                        27
Counterfactual Metrics Through CDHMM Generated Ghosts
To better isolate individual defensive contributions, we outline a set of counterfactual metrics that com-
pare the impact of a defender’s observed positioning, dtj , to a baseline (ghost) position. These metrics
quantify how a defender influences specific outcomes by measuring the difference in predicted values when
the defender is placed at their actual location versus a simulated position generated from our CDHMM.
We consider a Point-Ghost baseline that substitutes the emission mean for the defender’s position un-
der a strict marking role. However, because our outcome prediction models are nonlinear in position,
E[f (X)] ̸= f (E[X]), point ghost comparisons introduce bias potentially underestimating the value of tight
man-marking. If a defender should be shadowing on a particular side of the attacker then the tails of the
ghost position distribution matter. We therefore adopt an Expected Ghost baseline, integrating predictions
over the role-conditioned emission through Monte Carlo sampling, and report that by default.
                                                                
                                    Ex|k · := Ex∼p(dtj |st =qk ) · ,

    While our empirical analysis focuses on pass reception probabilities, the same framework extends nat-
urally to other outcome prediction models. In particular, we highlight how expected threat models could
be used to capture a defender’s influence on downstream scoring potential, although we do not include
empirical results using such models in this paper.

                                            (r)
               Reception Suppression:     ∆tjk = Ex|k [Pr (atk | x)] − Pr (atk | dtj ),                   (10)
                                            (rec)
                       Recovery Gain:     ∆tjk = Pr (dtj ) − Ex|k [Pr (x)] ,                              (11)
                                           (th)
                   Threat Suppression:    ∆tjk = Ex|k [Pthreat (atk | x)] − Pthreat (atk | dtj ),         (12)
                                           (ca)
                  Counterattack Value:    ∆tjk = Pthreat (dtj ) − Ex|k [Pthreat (x)] .                    (13)

Group-Level Evaluation
While the above metrics evaluate individual attacker-defender interactions, they do not penalize defenders
who fail to cover the most threatening attackers nearby. To address this, we introduce another metric, Group
Coverage Advantage (GCA), which attempts to quantify if the defender’s current position is advantageous
compared to if they were strictly marking any of the attackers in a nearby region. In order to define which
attackers we should consider we construct per-attacker attention weights using a softmax over ESO values:
                                                  exp(γtjk /τ )
                                         wtjk = PJ                 ,                                      (14)
                                                 ℓ=1 exp(γtℓk /τ )

where τ is a temperature parameter. This attacker-level vector shows which defenders could be reasonably
affecting the attacker at each timestep, taking into account every defender’s possible marking interactions
with the attacker. We then define the set of attackers Kjt that defender j could plausibly influence at time t,

                                          Kjt = {k : wtjk ≥ θ} ,                                          (15)

for threshold θ, where tuning θ determines a minimum level of interaction between that defender and the
attacker relative to the defender’s teammates.
    Let ftk (x) be a general function that predicts an outcome success probability for attacker k given a
defender’s position x. We define the total group score as
                                                      X
                                           Gjt (x) =      ftk (x).                                   (16)
                                                      k∈Kjt


                                                      28
If for example ftk (dtj ) = Pr (atk | dtj ), the total group score would represent the total reception probability
of attackers that the defender could feasibly choose to mark given his own and teammates’ positions. In re-
ality, a defender’s positioning will likely be a mixture of weighting themselves towards multiple opponents
and passing avenues, in order to evaluate the defender’s observed positioning we calculate |Kjt | counter-
factual baselines where we simulate the defender’s position from the emission distribution corresponding to
man-marking each attacker k ′ ∈ Kjt . The optimal baseline score over this group is then,
                                           opt
                                         Gjt = min
                                               ′
                                                   Ex|k′ [Gjt (x)],                                          (17)
                                                  k ∈Kjt

the total outcome success probability that the defender would concede if they chose the most advantageous
of all feasible man-marking roles, noting that the min operator may be replaced by max depending on the
outcome model used (e.g., maximizing recovery probability instead of minimizing threat).
    Finally, we define the Group Coverage Advantage at time t as
                                                           opt
                                         GCAj (t) = Gjt − Gjt (dtj ),                                        (18)

which measures how much additional value (e.g., threat) is allowed by the real defender’s positioning com-
pared to the best of the ghost baselines over the group of feasible attackers.


Data availability
The tracking and event datasets analysed in this study are subject to third-party licensing agreements and
club confidentiality restrictions. As a result, the raw data cannot be shared publicly.


Code availability
The code used for data processing, model training, and analysis was developed in a proprietary club context
and is not publicly available. The authors are happy to answer specific implementation questions to support
reproducibility of the methodology on independently obtained data.


Acknowledgments
We thank the performance analysis staff at Nottingham Forest FC (NFFC) for their support and domain
expertise. In particular, we acknowledge the analysts who produced the human baseline annotations used
for evaluation of the corner reception prediction task. We also thank colleagues involved in establishing the
industry–PhD programme that supported this work. This research was supported by NFFC, however the
views expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of NFFC.


Author contributions
SG led the study design, developed the methodology, implemented the models, curated the data, performed
the experiments and analysis, and wrote the original manuscript. SW supervised the research, contributed
to study design and methodological decisions, and critically revised the manuscript. FB provided project
support and domain guidance, contributed feedback on modelling choices and interpretation, and critically
revised the manuscript. AR contributed to model design and study design through set-piece domain discus-
sions, supported interpretation of results, and critically revised the manuscript. LA contributed to supervi-
sion and provided feedback on interpretation and framing, and critically revised the manuscript.

                                                       29
Competing interests
This research was conducted in collaboration with a professional football club that may have a competitive
interest in the study outcomes. Due to confidentiality and competitive considerations, data and code are not
publicly shared. The authors declare no other competing interests.


References
 [1] J. Gudmundsson and M. Horton. Spatio-temporal analysis of team sports. Acm Computing Surveys,
     50(2), 2017. Gudmundsson, Joachim Horton, Michael 1557-7341.
 [2] D. Memmert and R. Rein. Match analysis, big data and tactics: Current trends in elite soccer. Deutsche
     Zeitschrift f¸r Sportmedizin, 69(3):65–72, 2018.
 [3] T. Taki, J. Hasegawa, Society Ieee Computer, and Society Ieee Computer. Visualization of dominant
     region in team games and its application to teamwork analysis. In 18th Computer Graphics Inter-
     national Conference of the Computer-Graphics-Society (CGI 2000), pages 227–235, 2000. Taki, T
     Hasegawa, J.
 [4] William Spearman, Austin Thomas Basye, Gregory J. Dick, Ryan Hotovy, and Paul Pop Hudl. Physics-
     based modeling of pass probabilities in soccer.
 [5] Lewis Higgins, Tobias Galla, Brian Prestidge, and Terry Wyatt. Measuring the pitch control of
     professional football players using spatiotemporal tracking data. Journal of Physics: Complexity,
     4(2):025008, 2023.
 [6] Sarah Rudd. A framework for tactical analysis and individual offensive production assessment in
     soccer using markov chains. In New England Symposium on Statistics in Sports (NESSIS), Harvard
     University, Cambridge, MA, September 2011. Conference presentation; slides.
 [7] Karun Singh.   Introducing expected threat (xt).                     https://karun.in/blog/
     expected-threat.html, December 2018. Blog post.
 [8] Daniel Cervone, Alex D’Amour, Luke Bornn, and Kirk Goldsberry. A multiresolution stochastic
     process model for predicting basketball possession outcomes. Journal of the American Statistical
     Association, 111(514):585–599, 2016.
 [9] T. Decroos, L. Bransen, J. Van Haaren, J. Davis, and Machinery Assoc Comp. Actions speak louder
     than goals: Valuing player actions in soccer. In 25th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on
     Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD), pages 1851–1861, 2019. Decroos, Tom Bransen,
     Lotte Van Haaren, Jan Davis, Jesse Davis, Jesse J/A-3596-2015 Bransen, Lotte/0000-0002-0612-7999;
     Davis, Jesse/0000-0002-3748-9263.
[10] J. Fernández, L. Bornn, and D. Cervone. A framework for the fine-grained evaluation of the in-
     stantaneous expected value of soccer possessions. Mach Learn, 110(6):1389–1427, 2021. 1573-
     0565 Fernández, Javier Orcid: 0000-0002-6297-042x Bornn, Luke Cervone, Daniel Journal Article
     United States 2021/11/12 Mach Learn. 2021;110(6):1389-1427. doi: 10.1007/s10994-021-05989-6.
     Epub 2021 May 24.
[11] Leander Forcher, Stefan Altmann, Leon Forcher, Darko Jekauc, and Matthias Kempe. The use of
     player tracking data to analyze defensive play in professional soccer - a scoping review. International
     journal of sports science and coaching, 17(6):1567–1592, 2022.

                                                    30
[12] K. Tuyls, Shayegan Omidshafiei, Paul Muller, Zhe Wang, Jerome T. Connor, Daniel Hennes, I. Gra-
     ham, W. Spearman, Tim Waskett, D. Steele, Pauline Luc, Adrià Recasens, Alexandre Galashov, Gre-
     gory Thornton, R. Élie, P. Sprechmann, Pol Moreno, Kris Cao, M. Garnelo, Praneet Dutta, Michal
     Valko, N. Heess, Alex Bridgland, J. Pérolat, B. D. Vylder, A. Eslami, Mark Rowland, Andrew Jae-
     gle, R. Munos, T. Back, Razia Ahamed, Simon Bouton, Nathalie Beauguerlange, Jackson Broshear,
     T. Graepel, and D. Hassabis. Game plan: What ai can do for football, and what football can do for ai.
     ArXiv, abs/2011.09192, 2020.

[13] Charbel Merhej, Ryan Beal, S. Ramchurn, and Tim Matthews. What happened next? using deep
     learning to value defensive actions in football event-data. Proceedings of the 27th ACM SIGKDD
     Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, 2021.

[14] Leander Forcher, Leon Forcher, Stefan Altmann, D. Jekauc, and M. Kempe. The success factors of
     rest defense in soccer - a mixed-methods approach of expert interviews, tracking data, and machine
     learning. Journal of sports science & medicine, 22 4:707–725, 2023.

[15] Hoang Minh Le, Peter Carr, Yisong Yue, and P. Lucey. Data-driven ghosting using deep imitation
     learning. In unknown, 2017.

[16] Ronald Yurko, Quang Nguyen, and Konstantinos Pelechrinis. Nfl ghosts: A framework for evaluating
     defender positioning with conditional density estimation. 2024.

[17] Thomas Seidl, A. Cherukumudi, Andrew Hartnett, Peter Carr, and P. Lucey. Bhostgusters : Realtime
     interactive play sketching with synthesized nba defenses. In unknown, 0.

[18] Sigrid Olthof and Jesse Davis. Perspectives on data analytics for gaining a competitive advantage in
     football: computational approaches to tactics. Science and Medicine in Football, pages 1–13. doi:
     10.1080/24733938.2025.2533784.

[19] Luca Scofano, Alessio Sampieri, Giuseppe Re, Matteo Almanza, Alessandro Panconesi, and Fabio
     Galasso. About latent roles in forecasting players in team sports. Neural Processing Letters, 56(2),
     February 2024.

[20] Daniel Fassmeyer, Martin Cordes, and Ulrich Brefeld. Interactive sequential generative models for
     team sports. Machine Learning, 114(1):38, 2025.

[21] Gregory Everett, Ryan J. Beal, Tim Matthews, Timothy J. Norman, and Sarvapali D. Ramchurn. Eval-
     uating defensive influence in multi-agent systems using graph attention networks. In 2025 IEEE 12th
     International Conference on Data Science and Advanced Analytics (DSAA), 2025.

[22] Sarthak Jain and Byron C. Wallace. Attention is not explanation. In Proceedings of the 2019 Con-
     ference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
     Language Technologies (NAACL-HLT), pages 3543–3556. Association for Computational Linguistics,
     2019.

[23] Sarah Wiegreffe and Yuval Pinter. Attention is not not explanation. In Proceedings of the 2019
     Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pages 11–20.
     Association for Computational Linguistics, 2019.

[24] Hyunsung Kim, Sangwoo Seo, Hoyoung Choi, Tom Boomstra, Jinsung Yoon, and Chanyoung Park.
     Better prevent than tackle: Valuing defense in soccer based on graph neural networks, 2025.



                                                   31
[25] Laurie Shaw and Sudarshan Gopaladesikan. Routine inspection: A playbook for corner kicks. In
     Machine Learning and Data Mining for Sports Analytics: 7th International Workshop, MLSA 2020,
     Co-located with ECML/PKDD 2020, Ghent, Belgium, September 14–18, 2020, Proceedings 7, pages
     3–16. Springer, 2020.
[26] Pascal Bauer, Gabriel Anzer, and Joshua Wyatt Smith. Individual role classification for players de-
     fending corners in football (soccer). Journal of Quantitative Analysis in Sports, 18(2):147–160, 2022.
[27] Zhe Wang, Petar Velickovic, Daniel Hennes, Nenad Tomašev, Laurel Prince, Michael Kaisers, Yoram
     Bachrach, Romuald Élie, Wenliang Kevin Li, Federico Piccinini, William Spearman, Ian Graham,
     Jerome T. Connor, Yi Yang, Adrià Recasens, Mina Khan, Nathalie Beauguerlange, Pablo Sprechmann,
     Pol Moreno, Nicolas Manfred Otto Heess, Michael Bowling, Demis Hassabis, and Karl Tuyls. Tacticai:
     an ai assistant for football tactics. ArXiv, abs/2310.10553, 2023.
[28] Christopher M. Bishop. Pattern recognition and machine learning. New York : Springer, [2006]
     ©2006, 2006. Textbook for graduates.;Includes bibliographical references (pages 711-728) and index.
[29] L. R. Rabiner. A tutorial on hidden markov-models and selected applications in speech recognition.
     Proceedings of the Ieee, 77(2):257–286, 1989. Rabiner, lr 1558-2256.
[30] Sean Groom, Dan Morris, Liam Anderson, and Shuo Wang. Modeling defensive dynamics in football:
     A hidden markov model-based approach for man-marking and zonal defending corner analysis. In
     The 2nd International Workshop on Intelligent Technologies for Precision Sports Science (IT4PSS) in
     Conjunction with the 33rd International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI’24), June
     2024. Not yet published as of 16/07/2024; The 2nd International Workshop on Intelligent Technologies
     for Precision Sports Science (IT4PSS) : in Conjunction with the 33rd International Joint Conference
     on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI’24), IT4PSS ; Conference date: 04-08-2024.
[31] A. Franks, A. Miller, L. Bornn, and K. Goldsberry. Characterizing the spatial structure of defensive
     skill in professional basketball. Annals of Applied Statistics, 9(1):94–121, 2015. Franks, Alexander
     Miller, Andrew Bornn, Luke Goldsberry, Kirk Franks, Alexander/0000-0002-9329-206X.
[32] Joy A. Thomas Thomas M. Cover. Entropy, Relative Entropy, and Mutual Information, volume 2nd
     Edition, pages 13–55. Wiley, 2006.
[33] David E. Rumelhart, Geoffrey E. Hinton, and Ronald J. Williams. Learning representations by back-
     propagating errors. Nature, 323(6088):533–536, 1986.
[34] Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. Deep Learning. MIT Press, 2016.
[35] Shaked Brody, Uri Alon, and Eran Yahav. How attentive are graph attention networks?, 2022.
[36] Petar Veličković, Guillem Cucurull, Arantxa Casanova, Adriana Romero, Pietro Liò, and Yoshua Ben-
     gio. Graph attention networks, 2018.
[37] Pegah Rahimian and Laszlo Toka. A data-driven approach to assist offensive and defensive
     players in optimal decision making. International Journal of Sports Science and Coaching,
     0(0):17479541221149481.
[38] H. W. Kuhn. The hungarian method for the assignment problem. Naval Research Logistics Quarterly,
     2(1-2):83–97, 1955.
[39] James Munkres. Algorithms for the assignment and transportation problems. Journal of the Society
     for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, 5(1):32–38, 1957.


                                                    32
Appendix
Transition Model Dynamics
Figure 12 shows further examples of how the probability of continuing to mark a attacker for one second
varies as distance and relative velocity of the man-marking pair varies.

Sensitivity Analysis of the CDHMM
Corner kicks are relatively infrequent and may exhibit tactical variation over the course of a season. For
practical, in-season usage—where a team-specific model may be retrained week-by-week as new corners
occur—it is therefore important to understand how the CDHMM behaves under varying amounts of training
data. In this appendix, we report a sensitivity analysis that quantifies how learned parameters (zonal struc-
ture and transition weights) and overall fit (observation likelihood) change as additional sequences become
available.

Experimental design
For each team and delivery type (inswinging and outswinging), corner sequences from the 2023/24 sea-
son were ordered chronologically and incrementally grouped into training sets by adding batches of ten
sequences. At each training set size, we trained ten CDHMM instances using different random seeds to
account for variability due to EM initialization.
    This procedure reflects realistic deployment, but it blends two sources of variation: (i) finite-sample
estimation noise and (ii) potential distribution shift due to evolving execution or tactics over time. Rather
than attempting to isolate these effects, we characterise their combined influence on model reliability under
in-season retraining.
    Unless stated otherwise, sensitivity results pool outcomes across all teams that had sufficient data to sup-
port training at a given sample size. Bar charts beneath each plot indicate the number of teams contributing
at each training set size.

Stability metrics
We evaluate sensitivity along three dimensions:

    • Zonal structure disagreement. To assess stability of learned zonal structure, we match zonal Gaus-
      sians across model instances and measure the resulting mismatch cost. Concretely, for each pair of
      models trained at the same sample size, we compute the optimal assignment between their learned
      zonal Gaussians using the Hungarian algorithm, using the 2-Wasserstein distance as the matching
      cost. This cost captures differences in both Gaussian means and covariances. We report the average
      total matching cost across all model pairs (lower is more similar).

    • Transition weight disagreement. To quantify consistency in the learned transition model parameters,
      we compute the average pairwise ℓ2 distance between learned weight vectors for each transition type.
      We report disagreement separately for βm (man-marking continuation), βz (zonal continuation), and
      βs (switching).

    • Model fit (normalized observation log-likelihood). To evaluate overall fit, we record the final ob-
      servation log-likelihood achieved at convergence for each trained model and normalize it by the total
      number of timesteps across all training sequences (per-frame log-likelihood). We report distributions
      of these normalized values at each sample size.


                                                      33
Figure 12: Each subplot shows how the probability of continuing to man-mark a specific attacker (pm ) varies spa-
tially under different defender velocities. The attacker is fixed at the origin (0, 0) and moves rightward with velocity
(2.0, 0.0), with height 1.85 m and weight 82 kg. In each column, the defender moves in the same direction (indicated
by the green arrow and subfigure title), with speed increasing from top to bottom. From left to right, each column
shows the defender moving towards the left, right, down and up. Red arrows indicate the attacker’s velocity vector.
We plot three iso-probability contours at pm = 0.25, 0.5, and 0.75 to highlight decision boundaries. Note that since
data is sampled at 25 frames per second, the probability of maintaining a man-marking assignment is given by p25  m.




                                                          34
Zonal structure sensitivity
Figure 13 shows the distribution of average pairwise zonal structure disagreement across the 10 CDHMMs
trained at each sample size, shown separately for inswinging and outswinging deliveries. Across both de-
livery types, zonal disagreement generally decreases as sample size increases, with both the median and
interquartile range narrowing. This is consistent with reduced estimation noise as more data becomes avail-
able.
    Despite the overall stabilisation trend, occasional large outliers persist even at higher sample sizes.
These outliers do not consistently correspond to particular teams, suggesting they are not due to persistent
modelling failures for specific defensive styles. Instead, they likely reflect corner-to-corner variability in
execution or tactical structure: when a chronologically defined subset contains atypical sequences, the model
can converge to a noticeably different zonal configuration. Practically, this indicates that while the CDHMM
becomes more stable with additional data, a minority of retraining windows can yield substantially different
zone estimates, motivating uncertainty-aware model monitoring when deployed across a season.

Transition weight sensitivity
Figure 14 reports disagreement in transition weights as a function of training sample size. Two consistent
patterns emerge. First, estimation behaviour is similar between inswinging and outswinging deliveries,
yielding near-identical disagreement distributions for each parameter type. Second, the continuation weights
βm and βz converge relatively quickly: pairwise ℓ2 disagreements drop and stabilise once modest numbers
of corner samples are available. In contrast, the switching weights βs remain substantially more variable,
likely because switch events are comparatively rare. This suggests that uncertainty in βs may persist even
with additional data, motivating future work that shares statistical strength across teams (e.g., hierarchical
priors or grouped models) when estimating infrequent transitions.

Normalized likelihood sensitivity
Figure 15 presents distributions of normalized observation log-likelihoods as training sample size increases.
For both inswingers and outswingers, the average per-frame log-likelihood tends to become more negative
as additional sequences are incorporated before approximately plateauing. Although the CDHMM is trained
to maximise likelihood on the available dataset, this pattern is consistent with reduced overfitting as training
sets expand: models trained on limited data can fit repeated or idiosyncratic behaviours unusually well,
whereas larger datasets expose more tactical diversity and reduce the attainable average likelihood.
    The spread of normalized likelihoods typically narrows at larger sample sizes, indicating improved con-
sistency across random initializations and convergence toward a more stable representation of team be-
haviour. Inswinging deliveries achieve consistently higher normalized likelihoods than outswinging deliv-
eries, which may indicate that inswing defending exhibits more structured or predictable patterns that are
better aligned with the model assumptions.

Illustrative convergence of learned zones for a single team
To complement the aggregate disagreement metrics, Figure 16 provides a qualitative example of how an
individual team’s zonal configuration converges as more corners are added. The top row overlays zonal
Gaussians from all ten random initializations at each sample size, while the bottom row shows the single
best model selected by maximum observation likelihood. As sample size increases, both within-sample
variability (across random seeds) and between-sample variability (across training windows) diminish, indi-
cating increasingly stable zone estimates. Residual variation in the best models suggests that chronological



                                                      35
                                                (a) Inswing deliveries.




                                               (b) Outswing deliveries.

Figure 13: Zonal structure disagreement as a function of training sample size for the CDHMM. Each box plot shows
the distribution of pairwise zonal disagreement between models trained with the same sample size across all teams
(10 random seeds per team), with outliers plotted. Bar plots indicate the number of teams contributing at each sample
size.



                                                         36
                                                 (a) Inswing deliveries.




                                                (b) Outswing deliveries.

Figure 14: Disagreement in transition weight parameters as a function of training sample size for the CDHMM. Each
box plot shows the distribution of pairwise ℓ2 distances between transition weights (βs , βm , βz ) learned from models
trained on the same sample size (10 random seeds per team), pooled across all teams with sufficient data. Outliers are
plotted. Bar plots indicate the number of teams contributing at each sample size.



                                                          37
                                                (a) Inswing deliveries.




                                               (b) Outswing deliveries.

Figure 15: Normalized observation log-likelihood as a function of training sample size for inswinging and outswinging
deliveries. Each box plot shows the distribution of per-frame log-likelihoods from CDHMMs trained with different
random seeds at the same sample size, pooled across teams with sufficient data. Log-likelihoods are normalized by the
total number of timesteps across all training sequences. Bar plots indicate the number of teams contributing at each
sample size.


                                                         38
subsets can still differ due to changes in execution or tactics over time, consistent with the outliers observed
in Figure 13.




                                                      39
Figure 16: Stability of learned defensive zone positions across increasing training sample sizes for an illustrative
team. The top row shows overlays of all 10 models trained at each sample size (each ellipse represents a bivariate
Gaussian zone; means are marked as black dots), while the bottom row shows the single best model selected by
maximum observation likelihood. As sample size increases, estimated zone positions become more stable and less
variable across random initializations, while remaining differences across chronological subsets suggest minor tactical
or execution changes over time.




                                                          40
