                                                 When Metropolis and Hastings Meet Bradley and Terry:
                                                               Exact MCMC From Preference Voting

                                                           Ariel Smogorghevski1         Nir Rosenfeld2         Yaniv Romano2,3
                                                  1
                                                   Department of Data and Decision Sciences, Technion – Israel Institute of Technology
                                                      2
                                                        Department of Computer Science, Technion – Israel Institute of Technology
arXiv:2609.00905v1 [cs.LG] 1 Sep 2026




                                             3
                                               Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Technion – Israel Institute of Technology


                                                                                         Abstract

                                                  Sampling from distributions conditioned on desired semantic properties is an emerging chal-
                                              lenge in modern generative modeling. Metropolis–Hastings (MH) provides a principled route
                                              to conditional sampling, but requires access to exact pointwise target-density evaluations, which
                                              are not available in generative settings. Meanwhile, pairwise comparisons by humans or model
                                             “judges” are highly accessible and have proved valuable across diverse applications. We introduce
                                              Pref-MH, a general exact MH sampler for judge-induced conditional distributions using only
                                              stochastic binary pairwise comparisons. Our key observation is that the MH unnormalized
                                              density ratio matches the preference odds of the Bradley–Terry (BT) choice model. The central
                                              challenge is that while MH requires precise ratio computation, BT judges provide only sampled
                                              binary feedback. To this end, we develop a valid accept/reject rule whose resulting Markov chain
                                              provably converges to the target distribution. We further show that, for a fixed proposal kernel
                                              and budget, Pref-MH is optimal in the Peskun–Tierney sense among this class of exact reversible
                                              acceptance rules. Experiments on text generation and molecular design with LLM judges, as
                                             well as image generation with VLM judges, demonstrate that Pref-MH provides a practical and
                                              flexible approach to conditional sampling when comparative feedback is relatively easy to obtain.



                                        1    Introduction

                                        Drawing samples from conditional distributions is a fundamental challenge in computational statistics
                                        and machine learning. Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods provide a canonical framework
                                        for this task, with Metropolis–Hastings (MH) serving as one of their most widely used instances
                                        [1, 2]. Such methods have found widespread use in probabilistic machine learning and across diverse
                                        applications ranging from statistical physics to computational biology [3–8]. Unlike methods that
                                        return a single “best” solution, MCMC enables repeated sampling of plausible instances from a
                                        target distribution. This makes it especially well suited to tasks requiring multiple diverse outputs,
                                        or settings in which a human selects a preferred option from a set of candidates. For example, in
                                        molecular design, MCMC can generate multiple molecules that satisfy a given criterion yet differ
                                        in their trade-offs across key properties such as efficacy, toxicity, and synthesizability [9–12].
                                        Modern generative models, such as large language models (LLMs) and vision-language models
                                        (VLMs), offer the potential to unlock a wide range of new applications that require sampling from
                                            Code is available online at https://github.com/Ariels34/Pref-MH.


                                                                                             1
  Proposal - 𝑥′    Compare 𝑥 (#) vs 𝑥′ with a judge

                    𝑥 (%)                            𝑥′             Acceptance probability
                                 vs                                                    𝑝& 𝑥 % 𝑞(𝑥 # |𝑥 % )      𝐾
                                                          𝛼! 𝑥 # , 𝑥 % ; 𝐾 ≔ min 1,                        ⋅
                                                                                      𝑝& 𝑥 # 𝑞(𝑥 % |𝑥 (#) ) 𝑁 − 𝐾 + 1

                   Run 𝑁 independent judge votes

                   𝐾 = # votes where 𝑥 ! > 𝑥 (#)
 𝑥 ∼ 𝑞(⋅ |𝑥 " )
                                      Is 𝑥′ better
                                       than 𝑥 (")?
                                                                   Reject                         Accept
 Current - 𝑥 (")                                                 w.p. 1 − 𝛼!                       w.p. 𝛼!
                                          or



                                                                𝑥 ("$%) = 𝑥 (")                  𝑥 ("$%) = 𝑥′
                                                                (proposal rejected)            (proposal accepted)



                       Repeat for 𝑡 = 1, 2, …



Figure 1: Illustration of our proposed Pref-MH for molecular design for drug discovery.
At each step t: (i) a proposal sample x′ is generated given the current state x(t) ; (ii) x′ is then
compared against x(t) by using N stochastic judge votes; (iii) the proposal x′ is either accepted or
rejected according to our vote-based acceptance rule αN . The right panel summarizes the results of
a molecular-design experiment (Section 4.4), highlighting that Pref-MH outperforms the score-based
baselines (lower is better).


semantically meaningful conditional distributions over complex modalities [13–17]. However, while
sampling from generative models in itself is straightforward, it is unclear how to rigorously ensure
that instances are indeed drawn from the correct and full target conditional distribution. For
example, if we wish to generate responses that are ‘helpful’, ‘polite’, and in ‘Shakespearean style’,
then prompting for these properties does not guarantee that generated completed sequences truly
satisfy them, nor does it provide control over the nature of variation across samples.
Our work addresses this gap by introducing a novel Metropolis–Hastings (MH) algorithm tailored to
generative models that enables principled conditional sampling. MH algorithms work by repeatedly
proposing a candidate sample given the current sample, which is either accepted or rejected according
to a predefined acceptance rule designed to ensure convergence to the desired conditional distribution
[2, 18, 19]. The key methodological challenge is that implementing the acceptance rule requires access
to the true unnormalized density ratios of the target conditional distribution. For current generative
models, this is typically infeasible [20]: informally, in our example, this would require computing
the probability of any given text under the distribution of all texts that are ‘helpful’, ‘polite’,
and ‘Shakespearean’. Similarly, in molecular design, it would require assigning exact conditional
likelihoods to molecules satisfying complex and often competing properties such as efficacy, toxicity,
and synthesizability.
To overcome this challenge, we leverage the fact that pairwise comparisons have become ubiquitous
in generative modeling, whether in model alignment via human comparative feedback [21–25] or in
the use of generative models as “judges” for benchmarks and competitions [26]. Such binary pairwise
comparisons are readily obtainable, broadly applicable across tasks, and have often proven effective
in practice. However, using pairwise comparisons for conditional sampling raises two difficulties.
First, the canonical MH algorithm innately depends on access to pointwise density ratios, making it
unclear how to incorporate pairwise feedback. Second, it requires computing density ratios precisely
in order to guarantee convergence to the target distribution, whereas judges provide only sample


                                                                        2
access to stochastic binary votes between alternatives.
This structural limitation raises a fundamental question: how to formulate an exact MCMC sampler
when the target distribution is accessible only through stochastic, binary pairwise comparisons?
Exactness here means that the resulting chain’s stationary distribution matches the desired target
judge-induced conditional distribution. In this paper, we show that such exact sampling is indeed
possible by introducing Pref-MH: the first exact MH framework that uses only binary pairwise
preference comparisons, with support for general state spaces and arbitrary proposal kernels. Figure 1
visualizes the method in the context of de novo molecular design, where the goal is to generate
molecules (SMILES-encoded) for downstream drug discovery campaigns; a task we revisit later in
our experiments.


Preview of Pref-MH and key contributions

We begin by observing a simple but powerful connection (Section 3.1): under the assumption that
the conditional target is structured as a Gibbs distribution, the MH acceptance ratio closely mirrors
the Bradley-Terry (BT) preference model from discrete choice [27, 28]. In MH, the acceptance rule
depends on the ratio between the target densities of two candidate inputs. Under the BT model,
the odds of comparison probabilities equal the ratio between the judge’s implicit (and unobserved)
preference ‘strength’ for the two candidates. We link the two by establishing a theoretical equivalence
between both ratios.
Our key contribution is to then turn this connection between MH and BT into a practical, exact
sampling algorithm. The main difficulty is that the sampler does not have access to the underlying
comparison probability itself; rather, it can only query judges to obtain binary preference votes
for a given input pair. A natural idea is therefore to estimate the required odds ratio by first
estimating each comparison probability independently from multiple samples, and then plugging
the ratio of these estimates into the standard MH acceptance rule. We prove a strong impossibility
result: any procedure that uses a fixed number of binary comparisons—including such plug-in
estimation—cannot implement the oracle acceptance rule (Thm. 1). Intuitively, this holds since
even small errors in estimating the acceptance ratio can accumulate to completely distort the chain’s
induced stationary distribution [29, 30]. We circumvent this impossibility by designing a randomized
accept/reject mechanism whose marginal acceptance probabilities satisfy the Hastings ratio induced
by the pairwise judges; see the illustration in Figure 1. Although this does not implement the oracle
rule, it nonetheless yields a Markov chain whose stationary distribution provably matches the target
conditional distribution—despite using only a fixed number of sampled binary comparisons at each
transition (Thm. 2 and Cor. 1).
Our resulting Pref-MH method is an exact reversible MCMC sampler that never evaluates a pointwise
score function and never plugs in an estimated comparison probability or numerical approximation
to the acceptance ratio. Moreover, we establish a strong optimality result (Thm. 3): for any
fixed proposal mechanism and fixed comparison budget, Pref-MH is optimal in the Peskun–Tierney
sense among the class of exact competitors using the same number of pairwise comparisons [31, 32].
Because the rule is parameterized by a fixed number of judge queries, the user can choose the per-step
comparison budget; increasing this budget can, in turn, support higher acceptance probabilities,
allowing the sampler to explore the space of plausible candidates more effectively.
Finally, our accept/reject mechanism extends naturally to multi-judge settings (Sec. 3.5). This is
because our method treats proposal generation and comparative evaluation as separate components:


                                                  3
one proposes candidate samples, while the other judges their relative fit to the desired proper-
ties. This allows us to combine multiple independent comparative criteria—for example, one for
helpfulness, one for politeness, and one for Shakespearean-ness–without reducing them to a single
manually-weighted aggregate score or a single judge query. More broadly, this yields a modular way
to build samplers from diverse comparative feedback sources, where each “judge” specializes in a
single property, enabling conditional sampling that is more direct and easier to adapt across tasks.
We conclude with experiments demonstrating the utility and flexibility of the resulting sampler
across several conditional generation tasks, including synthetic experiments, text generation, image
generation, and molecular design for drug discovery. Figure 1 highlights the results from the
molecular-design experiment (Sec. 4.4), showing that our Pref-MH achieves better performance on
an external evaluation metric, than MH baselines that do not use pairwise LLM judgments. The
MolSkill metric presented reflects a human expert quality score [33] and we do not use it to guide
the sampling, making it an objective performance measure.


Related work. Fotakis et al. [34] study perfect sampling from pairwise comparisons over a fixed
finite item set, using comparison samples from a local sampling scheme. Human-in-the-loop MCMC
methods, such as Sanborn and Griffiths [35], Sanborn et al. [36], Harrison et al. [37], use human choices
to construct sampling procedures for subjective or semantic representations, but are tied to specific
behavioral protocols, choice models, or update structures. A different line of work uses MH or related
MCMC methods in generative modeling and controllable generation, including energy-based sampling
for masked or controllable language models and quality-aware sampling for machine translation
[38–43]. Recent inference-time sampling methods have also used MCMC-inspired procedures to
improve LLM reasoning, but rely on base-model likelihoods rather than pairwise comparison-only
access [44]. These methods strictly rely on an evaluable energy, score, reward, likelihood, constraint
indicator, or quality metric. Our Pref-MH differs in its technical scope: It offers an MH accept/reject
rule for general state spaces, user-chosen proposal kernels, and builds on comparisons between
the current and proposed states. Pref-MH is not restricted to finite catalogs, symmetric proposals,
Barker-style updates, or pointwise reward evaluations. Further, Pref-MH supports any fixed finite
comparison budget per transition, trading judge cost for higher acceptance and exploration while
preserving the target distribution exactly. Additional related work is in Appx. A.


2    Problem Setup and Background

Let X denote the sample space (e.g., plots for a film, math word problems, posters for an event), and
let M be a property of interest, such as adherence to an instruction, factual correctness, or a particular
style. We assume access to a base distribution p0 over X —typically a generative model—but no
direct mechanism for conditioning p0 on M . To define this conditioning, we consider settings in which
the question of whether an input x admits the property M can be evaluated by a judge, e.g., human
or generative model. Formally, we define the judge-induced target conditional distribution to be:

                                            p0 (x) pJ (M | x)
                  π(x) := p(x | M ) = R                           ∝ p0 (x) pJ (M | x),                 (1)
                                         X 0 (u) pJ (M | u) dµ(u)
                                          p

Here pJ (M | x) denotes the probability that x satisfies M according to a given judge J. In words,
the target π can be viewed as a reweighting of the base distribution p0 toward samples which the
judge J views as more likely to exhibit the property M . Crucially, in this work, we do not assume


                                                    4
that we have direct access to pJ (M | x), but rather have only sample access to pairwise comparisons
between two candidates x and x′ . This restriction is in line with many settings in which head-to-head
comparisons are available via a judge, whereas the true probability pJ (M | x) is generally unknown.
In general, M may reflect multiple desiderata that should hold simultaneously, such as helpfulness,
politeness, and stylistic fidelity. To ease the exposition of our method, we begin with a single
property M and return to the multi-condition case M = (M1 , . . . , Mm ) in Section 3.5.


Metropolis–Hastings sampling. MH is a general algorithm that produces samples from a
target distribution π by constructing a Markov chain whose stationary distribution matches the
target. Given an initial state x0 and a chosen proposal kernel q(x′ | x), MH generates a sequence of
samples in the following manner: At each state x, a new candidate state x′ is proposed by sampling
x′ ∼ q(· | x). Then, x′ is accepted with probability:
                                                      π(x′ ) q(x | x′ )
                                                                       
                                         ′
                                αMH (x, x ) = min 1,                      .                      (2)
                                                      π(x) q(x′ | x)
If successful, the state transitions from x to x′ , otherwise it remains at x. The proposal kernel q
is the main design choice controlling how the sampler explores X , from global proposals such as
resampling from p0 to local proposals such as modifying the current state. A key feature of our setup
is that it leaves this proposal mechanism user-specified. Thus, Pref-MH could be combined with any
valid proposal kernel, subject to the usual regularity conditions needed for convergence as stated
in Corollary 1. Repeating this accept/reject step iteratively produces the desired Markov chain.
In our setting, directly evaluating the target density π is infeasible. However, MH only requires
ratios of target densities, so substituting Eq. (1) into the MH ratio gives:
                           π(x′ ) q(x | x′ )   p0 (x′ ) q(x | x′ ) pJ (M | x′ )
                                             =                    ·             .                 (3)
                           π(x) q(x′ | x)      p0 (x) q(x′ | x) pJ (M | x)
The first factor is tractable since p0 is assumed given and q is a design choice. Since we do not
assume direct access to pJ (M | x), the remaining challenge lies in computing the likelihood ratio
pJ (M | x′ )/pJ (M | x).


3     Proposed Method: Exact Sampling from Preference-Based Judges

3.1   Integrating Bradley–Terry within Metropolis–Hastings

To present the basic construction of our method, suppose for a moment that we have access to
pJ (M | x). A straightforward way to compute the likelihood ratio in Eq. (3) is to compute pJ (M | x)
and pJ (M | x′ ) independently and then divide. Unfortunately, this is not rigorously possible
for generative models over arbitrary properties M . Instead, we make the (implicit) parametric
assumption that pJ (M | x) ∝ exp(s(x)) for some unknown, latent score function s : X → R. Under
this construction, the target in Eq. (1) admits the following Gibbs, score-tilted form

                                          π(x) ∝ p0 (x) es(x) .                                   (4)

Tilted distributions of this form play a central role in modern generative modeling and LLM
alignment, where one seeks to bias sampling toward a desired reward while staying close to the base
distribution [21, 23, 25, 45].

                                                     5
While the latent score is unknown, we can still leverage any pairwise comparison “judge” whose
(stochastic) preferences over elements in X are induced by s. For a judge J of the property M , the
parametric assumption on s entails probabilistic pairwise comparisons that follow:
                                                                      1
                          pJ (x ≺ x′ ) = σ s(x′ ) − s(x) ,
                                                        
                                                           σ(t) =         .                      (5)
                                                                  1 + e−t
where pJ (x ≺ x′ ) denotes the probability that judge J prefers x′ to x. This corresponds to the
canonical BT model for discrete choice [27, 28].
Substituting Eq. (5) into Eq. (3), we can now write the likelihood ratio using pairwise preferences:
                       pJ (M | x′ )       ′         pJ (x ≺ x′ )     pJ (x ≺ x′ )
                                    = es(x )−s(x) =              =                  ,                 (6)
                       pJ (M | x)                   pJ (x ≻ x′ )   1 − pJ (x ≺ x′ )

known as the win-rate ratio. Plugging this into Eq. (3) yields a preference-based acceptance rule:
                                            p0 (x′ ) q(x | x′ )   pJ (x ≺ x′ )
                                                                                
                              ′
                 αBT-MH (x, x ) := min 1,                       ·                  .            (7)
                                             p0 (x) q(x′ | x) 1 − pJ (x ≺ x′ )
                                            |        {z       } |      {z      }
                                                    r0 (x,x′ )    win-rate ratio w(x, x′ )

The above derivation shows that, if the comparison probability were available, the BT model would
provide the likelihood ratio needed to run MH without knowing the latent score itself. Essentially,
this enables us to replace the pointwise question “does x satisfy M ?” with the pairwise question
“which of x and x′ is more likely M ?”. However, this creates a different challenge: we need access
to the win-rate ratio w(x, x′ ). As a result, Eq. (7) does not yet provide an implementable sampler,
since the sampler observes only binary comparisons drawn by the judge. The question, then, is how
to construct an exact reversible kernel for π given only access to such one-bit judge outcomes.


3.2    Impossibility of directly implementing the BT-MH acceptance rule

Since each judge’s query returns only a binary vote, one may hope that a fixed number of such
outcomes is enough to implement the oracle acceptance probability αBT-MH (x, x′ ). For example,
one natural attempt is to query the judge N times on the pair (x, x′ ), estimate pJ (x ≺ x′ ), and
plug this estimate into Eq. (7). However, we show that this strategy, and in fact any fixed-budget
procedure over binary votes, cannot reproduce the oracle BT-MH acceptance probability for every
value of the unknown comparison probability pJ (x ≺ x′ ) = p ∈ (0, 1).
Theorem 1 (No fixed-budget implementation of the BT-MH acceptance rule). Fix a proposed move
x → x′ , and suppose that r0 (x, x′ ) ∈ (0, ∞). For any N < ∞, there is no procedure using only N
samples J (1) , . . . , J (N ) ∼ Bernoulli(p) whose marginal acceptance probability equals αBT-MH (x, x′ )
simultaneously for all p ∈ (0, 1).
The proof is given in Appx. D.1

A few remarks are in place. First, the assumption r0 (x, x′ ) ∈ (0, ∞) merely excludes degenerate
proposed moves whose acceptance decision is independent of the judge outcomes. Second, the
fixed-budget requirement is important in modern LLM- or human-as-a-judge applications in which
judge queries are often costly, and a sampler should have a prescribed finite comparison cost per MH
step. Third, the theorem does not rule out exact fixed-budget sampling altogether; rather, it rules
out any attempt for reproducing the exact oracle BT-MH acceptance probability from finitely many
binary comparisons. In turn, this highlights a fundamental challenge in obtaining an exact Pref-MH
sampler. This motivates the next subsection, where we construct a valid accept/reject rule directly.

                                                     6
3.3    A budget-optimal acceptance rule via N -vote construction

We now give an explicit fixed-budget acceptance rule for Pref-MH—using only binary judge outcomes,
while ensuring that the resulting Markov chain exactly matches the target distribution π.
Fix a current state x and a proposal x′ ∼ q(· | x). Our construction queries the judge independently
                                                                  iid
N times
      PNon the  pair (x, x′ ), resulting in J (1) , . . . , J (N ) ∼ Bernoulli(pJ (x ≺ x′ )). We denote by
K := t=1 J , the number of votes favoring the proposal x′ . With this in place, we now define
            (t)

our Pref-MH acceptance rule, given by
                                                                              
                                  ′                               ′    K
                         αN (x, x ; K) := min 1, r0 (x, x )                      .                      (8)
                                                                    N −K +1

A useful way to view the above N -vote rule is as follows. We start from the tractable baseline factor
r0 (x, x′ ) and then adjust it according to the evidence from the judge. The vote count K summarizes
that evidence. If many votes favor the proposal x′ , it is desired to upweight r0 (x, x′ ) and increase
the probability of accepting x′ . By contrast, if few votes favor the proposal, it is desired to reduce
the acceptance probability by downweighting r0 (x, x′ ). The factor above does exactly this. When
K = N , the factor equals N , giving the largest upweighting; when K = 0, the factor equals 0,
ensuring the proposal will be rejected; and when the vote is roughly split, the factor is close to 1, so
the decision is driven mainly by r0 (x, x′ ).
This interpretation is also consistent with the BT odds. Indeed, for large N ,
                           K           K/N        a.s. pJ (x ≺ x′ )
                                =               −−−−→                 ,
                        N −K +1   1 − K/N + 1/N N →∞ 1 − pJ (x ≺ x′ )
so the vote-based factor behaves like a finite-sample surrogate for the ideal win-rate ratio. In turn,
since the acceptance probability is a continuous function of this vote-based factor, the realized
acceptance rule converges almost surely to the ideal MH update:
                                                                        pJ (x ≺ x′ )
                                                                                    
                                   K            a.s.
             min 1, r0 (x, x′ )              −−−−→ min 1, r0 (x, x′ )                    .
                                N − K + 1 N →∞                        1 − pJ (x ≺ x′ )
Hence, our proposed N -vote family may be viewed as a fixed-budget exact approximation toward
the full MH acceptance rule, with larger N yielding behavior closer to the ideal update.
In view of the impossibility result, the key question is whether the N -vote rule in Eq. (8) still
preserves the desired target distribution for every fixed finite N . The next theorem shows that
this is indeed the case. The key idea behind the proof is to show that the N -vote rule satisfies the
detailed balance property, defined as follows:

                π(x) q(x′ | x) ᾱN (x, x′ ) = π(x′ ) q(x | x′ ) ᾱN (x′ , x), for every x ̸= x′ .      (9)

Above, ᾱN (x, x′ ) denotes the acceptance probability, averaged over the random judge outcomes; it
is formally defined in Eq. (13) in the appendix.
Theorem 2 (Exactness of the N -vote acceptance rule). Under the BT parametric assumption from
Section 3.1, for every integer N ≥ 1, the N -vote acceptance rule in Eq. (8), combined with a valid
proposal kernel q, defines a Markov transition kernel that satisfies detailed balance with respect to π.
Consequently, the resulting chain is reversible and has π as a stationary distribution.
The proof is given in Appx. D.2

                                                       7
Algorithm 1 Single-judge Pref-MH with exact N -vote acceptance
Require: Initial state x(0) ∈ X , proposal kernel q(· | x), comparisons N ≥ 1, iterations T
 1: for t = 0, 1, . . . , T − 1 do
 2:    Propose x′ ∼ q(· | x(t) )
 3:    Query J P   independently N times on (x(t) , x′ ), and obtain J (1) , . . . , J (N ) .
 4:    Set K = N             (i)
                       i=1 J , and compute
                                                      (                                        )
                           x′ ,                             p0 (x′ ) q(x(t) | x′ )           K
                                                                                     ·
                           
                                   with probability min 1,                                        ,
            x(t+1) =                                        p0 (x(t) ) q(x′ | x(t) ) N − K + 1
                           
                            (t)
                            x , otherwise.

 5: return the trajectory x(0) , x(1) , . . . , x(T ) .



Having converted binary comparison outcomes into a valid, implementable accept/reject rule, we
now summarize the resulting single-judge Pref-MH sampler in Algorithm 1.
As with standard MH, stationarity alone does not by itself imply convergence from an arbitrary
initialization. To achieve this, we impose regularity assumptions on the proposal mechanism,
stated formally in Appx. D.3. These are common assumptions in the MH literature and are not
specific to preference-based sampling [19, 46]. Informally, these ensure that the chain can explore the
support of the target distribution and cannot get trapped in a deterministic cycle. For example, both
q(· | x) = p0 (·) and a q which only resamples a suffix of x using p0 satisfy these assumptions [43, 44, 47].
Corollary 1 (Convergence of the Pref-MH chain). Consider the setting of Theorem 2, and fix
any comparison budget N ≥ 1. Under the standard MH regularity assumptions on the proposal
mechanism, stated formally in Appx. D.3, the Markov chain generated by Algorithm 1 converges in
distribution to the judge-induced target distribution π, for every initialization in the support of π.
The proof is given in Appx. D.3


3.4    Optimality

We turn to show that our N -vote construction is optimal among exact fixed-budget acceptance
rules. The sense of optimality we use is the standard Peskun–Tierney (PT) ordering for MCMC. In
our setting, this ordering has a simple form. The proposal kernel q is fixed, and competing sampling
methods differ only in how they decide whether to accept or reject a proposal after observing exactly
N judge queries. Thus, it is enough to compare their acceptance probabilities for each proposed
move. We say that rule A dominates rule B in a PT-sense if, for every proposed move x → x′ ,

                     PA (accept x′ | x, x′ proposed) ≥ PB (accept x′ | x, x′ proposed).

Above, the probability is taken with respect to the randomness of the acceptance rule, which is
affected not only by the judge but also by the design of A and B. Intuitively, the idea is that among
samplers that preserve the same target distribution, the one that accepts more proposals explores
the space at least as efficiently.
The next theorem shows that our N -vote rule is optimal in this PT sense. That is, there is no other
exact acceptance rule that can assign a larger acceptance probability to any proposed move using
the same (i) proposal mechanism q, (ii) judge J, and (iii) number of judge queries N .

                                                          8
Theorem 3 (Peskun–Tierney optimality of the N -vote rule). Fix a proposal kernel q and a
comparison budget N ≥ 1. Among all exact acceptance rules satisfying detailed balance with respect
to π, that use the same proposal kernel and only the outcomes of exactly N judge queries per proposal,
the N -vote rule Peskun–Tierney dominates every competitor. Equivalently, for every proposed move
x → x′ , we have PN -vote (accept x′ | x, x′ proposed) ≥ Pcompetitor (accept x′ | x, x′ proposed).
The proof is given in Appx. D.4


3.5    Composing multiple judges

We now extend our Pref-MH to settings where one wishes to favor several attributes simultaneously—
for example, responses that are helpful, polite, and stylistically appropriate—without collapsing
them into a single hand-engineered score or judge.
Let M1 , . . . , Mm denote the desired conditions, and J1 , . . . , Jm the associated judges. We consider
the composite target
                                                         m                           m
                                                                                              !
                                                         Y                           X
              πm (x) := p(x | M1 , . . . , Mm ) ∝ p0 (x)   pJi (Mi | x) ∝ p0 (x) exp    si (x) .     (10)
                                                      i=1                             i=1

The first decomposition holds due to Bayes’ rule and under conditional independence given x, as
shown in Appx. E. This condition is satisfied in our setting because each event Mi is determined by an
independent judge Ji , conditional on x. The second transition holds under the parametric assumption
that pJi (Mi | x) ∝ exp (si (x)), i = 1, . . . , m, similarly to Eq. (4). As in the single-judge setting, we
assume that judge Ji follows a BT model with latent score si , satisfying pJi (x ≺ x′ ) = σ si (x′ )−si (x) ,
                                                                                                           

where pJi (x ≺ x′ ) denotes the probability that judge Ji prefers x′ to x.
Accordingly, for a proposal kernel q(x′ | x), the MH ratio factorizes as
                                                             m
                             πm (x′ ) q(x | x′ )           ′
                                                               Y pJ (x ≺ x′ )
                                                                    i
                                                 = r0 (x, x  )                    .                     (11)
                             πm (x) q(x′ | x)                   1 − pJi (x ≺ x′ )
                                                            i=1

Thus, the single-judge win-rate ratio is replaced by a product of the multiple judges’ win-rate ratios.
Since these comparison probabilities are not observed directly, for each judge Ji , we query the
pair (x, x′ ) independently N times and record in Ki the number of votes favoring x′ . Finally, our
multi-judge Pref-MH N -vote acceptance rule is given by
                                                                      m
                                                       (                           )
                     (m)    ′                                      ′
                                                                      Y    Ki
                    αN (x, x ; K1 , . . . , Km ) := min 1, r0 (x, x )                .            (12)
                                                                        N − Ki + 1
                                                                      i=1

Indeed, when m = 1, the rule in Eq. (12) reduces to the single-judge construction. This highlights
that the multiplication keeps the construction modular: adding a condition amounts to adding a
judge and multiplying by its corresponding N -vote factor.
Algorithm 2 (Appx. B) summarizes our resulting multi-judge Pref-MH sampler. The formal state-
ments and proofs of the exact MCMC property and PT optimality are given in Appx. D.5.


4     Experiments

We evaluate Pref-MH in four different settings. The first is a controlled experiment that demonstrates
the validity of our construction. The second focuses on multi-condition sampling for open-ended

                                                       9
text generation, showing the advantage of using separate judges when conditions are complex. The
third addresses image generation under multiple conditions, illustrating the ability of Pref-MH to
sample from the target even when the state space is over a complex continuous modality. Finally,
we study de novo molecular design, a real-world scientific design task where generating diverse
candidates with desirable chemical properties is critical for early-stage drug discovery. An additional
machine-translation experiment is presented in Appendix C.5.


4.1   Synthetic validation

To illustrate how Pref-MH converges to the true target distribution despite inexact pairwise feedback,
we consider a synthetic setting in which the target distribution is known exactly. We set p0 (x) to
be an arbitrary, non-uniform categorical distribution over k ∈ {0, . . . , 240}. We then set pJ (M | x)
indirectly by defining the judge’s preferences over elements in this set through a complex (latent)
score function s(k), defined as a smoothed sum of distances between k and three anchor states
{60, 130, 200}, and an additional linear component. Together, these determine π(k) ∝ p0 (k) exp(s(k)).
Binary judge outcomes are sampled from Eq. (5) using s. See Appx. C.1 for additional details.
We compare Pref-MH to an invalid Plug-in MH sampler                                 0.7                      Oracle MH
                                                                                                             Pref-MH, N = 1



                                                              Cumulative empirical TV
that estimates the win-rate odds from the observed judge                            0.6                      plug-in, N = 1
votes and plugs this empirical estimate into Eq. (7). By                                                     Pref-MH, N = 2
                                                                                    0.5                      plug-in, N = 2
Theorem 1, this plug-in baseline is invalid and is not                              0.4                      Pref-MH, N = 4
                                                                                                             plug-in, N = 4
guaranteed to converge to the target π. We consider                                 0.3
N ∈ {1, 2, 4} for both methods. As a benchmark, we also                             0.2
compare to an ‘oracle’ MH that has (pointwise) access to                            0.1
s—which is ideal, but infeasible. For all methods, we set                           0.0
q to be a symmetric mixture of a global uniform proposal                                  0    50         100           150
                                                                                              Chain step (×103)
over the finite state space and a local nearest-neighbor
move. Figure 2 shows a clear separation between Pref-MH
                                                            Figure 2: Synthetic validation of MH
and the invalid plug-in approach. Pref-MH continues to
                                                            methods. Cumulative empirical total
approach the target distribution as the chain progresses,
                                                            variation distance (TV) between the sam-
even with a single judge query per proposal. In contrast,
                                                            pled chain and the true target. The distri-
the plug-in chain plateaus at a large error even when
                                                            bution is visualized in Fig. 5 in the Appx.
using N = 4 judge queries.


4.2   Multi-condition text generation

We next consider open-ended text generation under multiple semantic properties. Llama-3.1-8B-
Instruct [48] serves as the base model and is prompted to generate the opening of a story from a
short scenario description. The dataset includes 50 different descriptions, such as “a weary traveler
arriving at a deserted inn just after midnight.” We condition on three stylistic properties: M1 =
‘elevated language,’ M2 = ‘a gothic or dramatic atmosphere,’ and M3 = ‘frequent dialogue.’ The
same LLM model is also used as a judge.
We evaluate two variants of our method. Pref-MH (sep.) uses a separate pairwise judge for each
property Mi , while Pref-MH (joint) uses a single pairwise judge prompted to assess all properties
jointly. We compare these against three baselines. Base LLM directly samples from the base model
without prompting for the desired attributes, testing whether MH can steer p0 toward the desired
conditional distribution. Pointwise-MH (sep.) is an MH sampler that prompts the Llama model


                                                  10
to assign pointwise scores, evaluating each property separately, and Pointwise-MH (joint) uses a
single pointwise score intended to assess the three properties jointly. The pointwise variants provide
natural score-based MH baselines, but their scalar scores should not be interpreted as equivalent to
the latent scores underlying the pairwise comparison model. Thus, even when using the same LLM,
pointwise scoring and pairwise comparison may define different evaluation signals. The proposal
kernel q(· | x) is a suffix-resampling kernel that uses the same Llama model. See Appx. C.2 for
details.
We compare methods by evaluating their ability                                  Pointwise
                                                                                Elevated
to achieve the three properties. Since there are no
                                                                      BT                          Pointwise
subjective measures for this, we use each method’s              Dialogue                          Gothic
evaluation signal: (i) pointwise scores for each se-                                              1.0
                                                                                            0.5
mantic property, and (ii) pairwise scores obtained
by fitting a BT model to each judge’s binary vote.
Figure 3 presents the results, where we normal-                       BT                          Pointwise
                                                                   Gothic                         Dialogue
ized each evaluation criterion across methods. As
                                                                                   BT
shown, Pref-MH with separate judges performs best                               Elevated
across all properties under the two metrics consid-       Pref-MH (sep.)          Pref-MH (joint)             Base p0
                                                          Pointwise-MH (sep.)     Pointwise-MH (joint)
ered. The gap between separate and joint Pref-MH
suggests that decomposing the conditioning crite-
ria into multiple judgments is advantageous. The       Figure 3: Passage generation under multi-
inferior performance of the pointwise-MH variants      ple stylistic properties. Pointwise scores and
suggests that pairwise comparisons are more dis-       BT coefficients are normalized across methods
criminative.                                           for each semantic property; higher is better.


4.3   Image generation in continuous space

The following stylized experiment demonstrates the applicability of Pref-MH on a completely different
modality: conditional image generation. Here, the state is a continuous latent noise vector. We
use a diffusion model (SDXL-Turbo) as the base image generator [49, 50], which maps an input
Gaussian noise vector to an image. Since the Gaussian density of each latent state can be evaluated,
we run the chain in the noise space and seek noise vectors whose decoded images satisfy the desired
properties. We use Qwen3-VL-8B-Instruct [51] as the VLM judge. See Appx. C.3 for details.
We consider multiple visual properties; the image should contain M1 = ‘an orange salamander,’
M2 = ‘a turquoise butterfly,’ and M3 = ‘a red mushroom.’ We compare the chain sampled by
Pref-MH to Pointwise-MH and base. The Base SDXL-Turbo model is prompted to generate images
with the desired properties. The two MH methods are implemented with the same base method
and prompt, but also using a separate VLM for each of the three conditions. Pref-MH uses N = 9
pairwise votes per judge, while Pointwise-MH uses per-property scores. Both methods use the same
proposal q, which randomly makes a local move, a wider move, or generates a fresh noise vector.
We evaluate each method’s performance by reporting the fraction of images generated in the chain
that contain all three desired objects. Object detection is performed using Gemma-3-12B-IT [52].
Our Pref-MH achieves a success rate of 63.6%, substantially outperforming Pointwise-MH and the
base model, which achieve success rates of 7.4% and 4.5%, respectively. At the same time, our
approach produces images of comparable visual quality, as measured by the Aesthetic Predictor V2.5
score [53] (higher is better). Specifically, the average aesthetic scores are 6.395, 6.289, and 6.287
for Pref-MH, Pointwise-MH, and the base model, respectively. These quantitative evaluations are


                                                 11
               Pref-MH (ours)                 Pointwise-MH                    Base

Figure 4: Image-generation samples, targeting three visual conditions: an orange salamander,
a turquoise butterfly, and a red mushroom. Samples correspond to MH steps 300, 1200, 1800, and
2700. Figure 6 presents additional samples. Notice that only Pref-MH achieves the three desired
properties.


consistent with the qualitative results. Figure 4 shows representative samples, and full evaluation
details are provided in Appx. C.3.


4.4   De novo molecular design from preference feedback

We next consider de novo molecular design, the task of generating candidate molecules with desirable
properties for downstream drug-discovery campaigns. This is a central challenge in computational
drug discovery, where the goal is to produce plausible candidates that can be inspected, compared,
and prioritized for experimental or medicinal-chemistry follow-up. MCMC-based molecular design
methods such as MARS [11] instantiate this idea by using multiple hand-crafted cheminformatics
scores; specifically, in our experiment we implemented it with proxies for drug-likeness (QED
score [54]) and synthetic accessibility (SA score [55]).
While useful, such scores capture only selected aspects of molecular quality and may fail to reflect the
full complexity of medicinal-chemistry decision-making. Choung et al. [33] make this point explicit
and developed a surrogate score model, called MolSkill, intended to capture aspects of chemist
preference that are not well explained by standard cheminformatics descriptors. The MolSkill score
model was trained on collected preference data from expert medicinal chemists. We will use this
model as an external evaluator in our experiments.
Inspired by MARS [11], we use a proposal kernel q that, given a current molecule x, generates a
molecule x′ by either randomly deleting a local fragment from x or randomly adding a local fragment
from a pre-defined vocabulary. Our Pref-MH uses Qwen3-235B-A22B-Instruct [56] as a pairwise
judge, prompted to choose which of two SMILES molecules is more promising for medicinal-chemistry
follow-up, with N = 8. We include Pointwise-MH as a natural baseline, which uses the same Qwen
model to provide a pointwise score using the same prompt but now asking the model to rate each
molecule from 1 to 10. We query the judge 8 times and average the results, ensuring that the
LLM-based baselines use the same compute budget. Additionally, we compare against MARS that
uses QED and SA scores, serving as a strong baseline. For this baseline, we implement the original
MARS proposal kernel, which learns a model q for proposing local fragment edits.
We run each method for 1000 MCMC steps and evaluate the final state of each chain using
the following molecular-design metrics: (1) QED for drug-likeness [54]; (2) SA for synthetic
accessibility [55], rescaled so that higher values indicate easier synthesis; (3) diversity [11]; and
(4) MolSkill [33], reported by both mean and median, as our primary external learned proxy for

                                                   12
          Method             QED          SA         Div.     MolSkill mean    MolSkill median
          MARS         .773 ±.002 .789 ±.006 .895 ±.005         -0.226 ±.544     -0.157 ±.464
          Pointwise-MH .606 ±.006 .761 ±.004 .900 ±.001         -0.098 ±.261      .303 ±.309
          Pref-MH      .698 ±.002 .781 ±.001 .899 ±.001         -1.432 ±.398     -1.116 ±.396

Table 1: Molecular design from preference feedback. Final-state evaluation after 1000
MCMC steps across cheminformatics metrics and MolSkill. Values report the mean and standard
error across the independent runs; higher is better for all metrics, except for MolSkill, for which
lower is better.

medicinal-chemist follow-up preference. See Appx. C.4 for implementation details.
Table 1 shows that Pref-MH achieves the best MolSkill mean and median, suggesting that pairwise
LLM feedback steers the chain toward molecules that are better aligned with medicinal-chemist
follow-up preference than either explicit cheminformatics scores or pointwise LLM scores. At the
same time, the remaining metrics indicate that this improvement does not come at a major cost to
other quality measures: Pref-MH maintains high diversity and a high SA score.


5    Discussion

Pref-MH is a flexible, exact MCMC sampler using only pairwise comparisons with an arbitrary
proposal kernel over a general state space. Our work makes the parametric BT assumption that
there exists an unknown latent score underlying judges’ preferences. This assumption is widely used
in modern generative modeling, discrete choice modeling, and beyond, but it may not hold exactly
in practice when using LLMs, VLMs, or humans as a judge. A promising future direction is to
characterize how violations of the BT assumption affect the coherence of the stationary distribution.
More broadly, our experiments highlight the possibility of treating comparative feedback not merely
as an evaluation signal, but as a direct interface for defining sampling distributions. This is especially
relevant in domains where the desired notion of quality is difficult to reduce to a pointwise score. In
our experiments, this role is played by an LLM judge, yet the same mechanism could in principle be
used with human experts. Relying on human judges, however, requires the development of efficient
versions of Pref-MH that utilize its ability to incorporate clever proposal functions, as otherwise
the annotation burden can be infeasible. This opens a broader route for incorporating powerful
generative models and expert comparative feedback into high-stakes design tasks.




                                                   13
References
 [1] Nicholas Metropolis, Arianna W Rosenbluth, Marshall N Rosenbluth, Augusta H Teller, and
     Edward Teller. Equation of state calculations by fast computing machines. The journal of
     chemical physics, 21(6):1087–1092, 1953.

 [2] W. K. Hastings. Monte carlo sampling methods using markov chains and their applications.
     Biometrika, 57(1):97–109, 1970.

 [3] Xiang Zhou and Scott C Schmidler. Bayesian parameter estimation in ising and potts models:
     A comparative study with applications to protein modeling. Department of Statistical Science,
     Duke University, Durham, NC, 2009.

 [4] Ulrich HE Hansmann and Yuko Okamoto. New monte carlo algorithms for protein folding.
     Current opinion in structural biology, 9(2):177–183, 1999.

 [5] John P Huelsenbeck, Fredrik Ronquist, Rasmus Nielsen, and Jonathan P Bollback. Bayesian
     inference of phylogeny and its impact on evolutionary biology. science, 294(5550):2310–2314,
     2001.

 [6] Mandev S Gill, Philippe Lemey, Nuno R Faria, Andrew Rambaut, Beth Shapiro, and Marc A
     Suchard. Improving bayesian population dynamics inference: a coalescent-based model for
     multiple loci. Molecular biology and evolution, 30(3):713–724, 2013.

 [7] Zhuowen Tu and Song-Chun Zhu. Image segmentation by data-driven markov chain monte
     carlo. IEEE Transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 24(5):657–673, 2002.

 [8] Ryan Turner, Jane Hung, Eric Frank, Yunus Saatchi, and Jason Yosinski. Metropolis-hastings
     generative adversarial networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages
     6345–6353. PMLR, 2019.

 [9] Jenna C Fromer and Connor W Coley. Computer-aided multi-objective optimization in small
     molecule discovery. Patterns, 4(2), 2023.

[10] Christos A. Nicolaou and Nathan Brown. Multi-objective optimization methods in drug design.
     Drug Discovery Today: Technologies, 10(3):e427–e435, 2013.

[11] Yutong Xie, Chence Shi, Hao Zhou, Yuwei Yang, Weinan Zhang, Yong Yu, and Lei Li. MARS:
     Markov molecular sampling for multi-objective drug discovery. In International Conference on
     Learning Representations, 2021.

[12] Tianfan Fu, Cao Xiao, Xinhao Li, Lucas M Glass, and Jimeng Sun. Mimosa: Multi-constraint
     molecule sampling for molecule optimization. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
     volume 35, pages 125–133, 2021.

[13] Zhiting Hu, Zichao Yang, Xiaodan Liang, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Eric P. Xing. Toward
     controlled generation of text. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine
     Learning - Volume 70, page 1587–1596. JMLR.org, 2017.

[14] Sumanth Dathathri, Andrea Madotto, Janice Lan, Jane Hung, Eric Frank, Piero Molino, Jason
     Yosinski, and Rosanne Liu. Plug and play language models: A simple approach to controlled
     text generation. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.


                                               14
[15] Kevin Yang and Dan Klein. FUDGE: Controlled text generation with future discriminators.
     In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for
     Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pages 3511–3535. Association for
     Computational Linguistics, 2021.

[16] Ben Krause, Akhilesh Deepak Gotmare, Bryan McCann, Nitish Shirish Keskar, Shafiq Joty,
     Richard Socher, and Nazneen Fatema Rajani. GeDi: Generative discriminator guided sequence
     generation. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2021, pages
     4929–4952. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2021.

[17] Xun Liang, Hanyu Wang, Yezhaohui Wang, Shichao Song, Jiawei Yang, Simin Niu, Jie Hu, Dan
     Liu, Shunyu Yao, Feiyu Xiong, and Zhiyu Li. Controllable text generation for large language
     models: A survey, 2024.

[18] Siddhartha Chib and Edward Greenberg. Understanding the metropolis-hastings algorithm.
     The American Statistician, 49(4):327–335, 1995.

[19] Luke Tierney. Markov chains for exploring posterior distributions. The Annals of Statistics, 22
     (4):1701–1728, 1994.

[20] Sanjit Dandapanthula and Nicholas M. Boffi. Are we really tilting? the mechanics of reward
     guidance in flow and diffusion models, 2026.

[21] Paul F Christiano, Jan Leike, Tom Brown, Miljan Martic, Shane Legg, and Dario Amodei. Deep
     reinforcement learning from human preferences. Advances in neural information processing
     systems, 30, 2017.

[22] Nisan Stiennon, Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Daniel M. Ziegler, Ryan Lowe, Chelsea Voss, Alec
     Radford, Dario Amodei, and Paul Christiano. Learning to summarize from human feedback.
     In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems,
     2020.

[23] Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin,
     Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, John Schulman, Jacob Hilton,
     Fraser Kelton, Luke Miller, Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder, Paul Christiano,
     Jan Leike, and Ryan Lowe. Training language models to follow instructions with human
     feedback. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.

[24] Yuntao Bai, Andy Jones, Kamal Ndousse, Amanda Askell, Anna Chen, Nova DasSarma,
     Dawn Drain, Stanislav Fort, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, Nicholas Joseph, Saurav Kadavath,
     Jackson Kernion, Tom Conerly, Sheer El-Showk, Nelson Elhage, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Danny
     Hernandez, Tristan Hume, Scott Johnston, Shauna Kravec, Liane Lovitt, Neel Nanda, Catherine
     Olsson, Dario Amodei, Tom Brown, Jack Clark, Sam McCandlish, Chris Olah, Ben Mann,
     and Jared Kaplan. Training a helpful and harmless assistant with reinforcement learning from
     human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.05862, 2022.

[25] Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Christopher D Manning, Stefano Ermon, and
     Chelsea Finn. Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model.
     Advances in neural information processing systems, 36:53728–53741, 2023.

[26] Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang,
     Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric Xing, Hao Zhang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica.

                                                15
    Judging LLM-as-a-judge with MT-bench and chatbot arena. In Thirty-seventh Conference on
    Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track, 2023.

[27] Ralph Allan Bradley and Milton E Terry. Rank analysis of incomplete block designs: I. the
     method of paired comparisons. Biometrika, 39(3/4):324–345, 1952.

[28] R. Duncan Luce. Individual choice behavior. Wiley New York, 1959.

[29] P. Alquier, N. Friel, R. Everitt, and A. Boland. Noisy monte carlo: convergence of markov
     chains with approximate transition kernels. Statistics and Computing, 26(1–2):29–47, 2016.

[30] A. Yu. Mitrophanov. Sensitivity and convergence of uniformly ergodic markov chains. Journal
     of Applied Probability, 42(4):1003–1014, 2005.

[31] P. H. Peskun. Optimum monte-carlo sampling using markov chains. Biometrika, 60(3):607–612,
     1973.

[32] Luke Tierney. A note on metropolis-hastings kernels for general state spaces. The Annals of
     Applied Probability, 8(1):1–9, 1998.

[33] Oh-Hyeon Choung, Riccardo Vianello, Marwin Segler, Nikolaus Stiefl, and José Jiménez-
     Luna. Extracting medicinal chemistry intuition via preference machine learning. Nature
     Communications, 14(1):6651, 2023.

[34] Dimitris Fotakis, Alkis Kalavasis, and Christos Tzamos. Perfect sampling from pairwise
     comparisons. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:25615–25630, 2022.

[35] Adam Sanborn and Thomas Griffiths. Markov chain monte carlo with people. Advances in
     neural information processing systems, 20, 2007.

[36] Adam N. Sanborn, Thomas L. Griffiths, and Richard M. Shiffrin. Uncovering mental represen-
     tations with markov chain monte carlo. Cognitive Psychology, 60(2):63–106, 2010.

[37] Peter Harrison, Raja Marjieh, Federico Adolfi, Pol van Rijn, Manuel Anglada-Tort, Ofer
     Tchernichovski, Pauline Larrouy-Maestri, and Nori Jacoby. Gibbs sampling with people.
     Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:10659–10671, 2020.

[38] Kartik Goyal, Chris Dyer, and Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick. Exposing the implicit energy networks
     behind masked language models via metropolis–hastings. In International Conference on
     Learning Representations, 2022.

[39] Fatemehsadat Mireshghallah, Kartik Goyal, and Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick. Mix and match:
     Learning-free controllable text generation using energy language models. In Proceedings of
     the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long
     Papers), pages 401–415. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2022.

[40] Jarad Forristal, Fatemehsadat Mireshghallah, Greg Durrett, and Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick. A
     block metropolis-hastings sampler for controllable energy-based text generation. In Proceedings
     of the 27th Conference on Computational Natural Language Learning (CoNLL), pages 403–413.
     Association for Computational Linguistics, 2023.




                                                16
[41] Li Du, Afra Amini, Lucas Torroba Hennigen, Xinyan Velocity Yu, Holden Lee, Jason Eisner,
     and Ryan Cotterell. Principled gradient-based MCMC for conditional sampling of text. In
     Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 235, pages
     11663–11685. PMLR, 2024.

[42] Emmanuel Anaya Gonzalez, Sairam Vaidya, Kanghee Park, Ruyi Ji, Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick,
     and Loris D’Antoni. Constrained sampling for language models should be easy: An MCMC
     perspective. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems,
     2025.

[43] Gonçalo R. A. Faria, Sweta Agrawal, António Farinhas, Ricardo Rei, José G. C. de Souza,
     and André F. T. Martins. QUEST: Quality-aware metropolis-hastings sampling for machine
     translation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 37:89042–89068, 2024.

[44] Aayush Karan and Yilun Du. Reasoning with sampling: Your base model is smarter than you
     think. In The Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2026.

[45] Sergey Levine. Reinforcement learning and control as probabilistic inference: Tutorial and
     review. arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.00909, 2018.

[46] Gareth O. Roberts and Jeffrey S. Rosenthal. General state space Markov chains and MCMC
     algorithms. Probability Surveys, 1:20 – 71, 2004.

[47] Jun S Liu. Metropolized independent sampling with comparisons to rejection sampling and
     importance sampling. Statistics and computing, 6(2):113–119, 1996.

[48] Aaron Grattafiori, Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian,
     Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Alex Vaughan, Amy Yang,
     Angela Fan, Anirudh Goyal, Anthony Hartshorn, Aobo Yang, Archi Mitra, Archie Sravanku-
     mar, Artem Korenev, Arthur Hinsvark, Arun Rao, Aston Zhang, Aurelien Rodriguez, Austen
     Gregerson, Ava Spataru, Baptiste Roziere, Bethany Biron, Binh Tang, Bobbie Chern, Char-
     lotte Caucheteux, Chaya Nayak, Chloe Bi, Chris Marra, Chris McConnell, Christian Keller,
     Christophe Touret, Chunyang Wu, Corinne Wong, Cristian Canton Ferrer, Cyrus Nikolaidis,
     Damien Allonsius, Daniel Song, Danielle Pintz, Danny Livshits, Danny Wyatt, David Esiobu,
     Dhruv Choudhary, Dhruv Mahajan, Diego Garcia-Olano, Diego Perino, Dieuwke Hupkes,
     Egor Lakomkin, Ehab AlBadawy, Elina Lobanova, Emily Dinan, Eric Michael Smith, Filip
     Radenovic, Francisco Guzmán, Frank Zhang, Gabriel Synnaeve, Gabrielle Lee, Georgia Lewis
     Anderson, Govind Thattai, Graeme Nail, Gregoire Mialon, Guan Pang, Guillem Cucurell,
     Hailey Nguyen, Hannah Korevaar, Hu Xu, Hugo Touvron, Iliyan Zarov, Imanol Arrieta Ibarra,
     Isabel Kloumann, Ishan Misra, Ivan Evtimov, Jack Zhang, Jade Copet, Jaewon Lee, Jan Geffert,
     Jana Vranes, Jason Park, Jay Mahadeokar, Jeet Shah, Jelmer van der Linde, Jennifer Billock,
     Jenny Hong, Jenya Lee, Jeremy Fu, Jianfeng Chi, Jianyu Huang, Jiawen Liu, Jie Wang, Jiecao
     Yu, Joanna Bitton, Joe Spisak, Jongsoo Park, Joseph Rocca, Joshua Johnstun, Joshua Saxe,
     Junteng Jia, Kalyan Vasuden Alwala, Karthik Prasad, Kartikeya Upasani, Kate Plawiak, Ke Li,
     Kenneth Heafield, Kevin Stone, Khalid El-Arini, Krithika Iyer, Kshitiz Malik, Kuenley Chiu,
     Kunal Bhalla, Kushal Lakhotia, Lauren Rantala-Yeary, Laurens van der Maaten, Lawrence
     Chen, Liang Tan, Liz Jenkins, Louis Martin, Lovish Madaan, Lubo Malo, Lukas Blecher, Lukas
     Landzaat, Luke de Oliveira, Madeline Muzzi, Mahesh Pasupuleti, Mannat Singh, Manohar
     Paluri, Marcin Kardas, Maria Tsimpoukelli, Mathew Oldham, Mathieu Rita, Maya Pavlova,
     Melanie Kambadur, Mike Lewis, Min Si, Mitesh Kumar Singh, Mona Hassan, Naman Goyal,


                                               17
Narjes Torabi, Nikolay Bashlykov, Nikolay Bogoychev, Niladri Chatterji, Ning Zhang, Olivier
Duchenne, Onur Çelebi, Patrick Alrassy, Pengchuan Zhang, Pengwei Li, Petar Vasic, Peter
Weng, Prajjwal Bhargava, Pratik Dubal, Praveen Krishnan, Punit Singh Koura, Puxin Xu, Qing
He, Qingxiao Dong, Ragavan Srinivasan, Raj Ganapathy, Ramon Calderer, Ricardo Silveira
Cabral, Robert Stojnic, Roberta Raileanu, Rohan Maheswari, Rohit Girdhar, Rohit Patel,
Romain Sauvestre, Ronnie Polidoro, Roshan Sumbaly, Ross Taylor, Ruan Silva, Rui Hou, Rui
Wang, Saghar Hosseini, Sahana Chennabasappa, Sanjay Singh, Sean Bell, Seohyun Sonia Kim,
Sergey Edunov, Shaoliang Nie, Sharan Narang, Sharath Raparthy, Sheng Shen, Shengye Wan,
Shruti Bhosale, Shun Zhang, Simon Vandenhende, Soumya Batra, Spencer Whitman, Sten
Sootla, Stephane Collot, Suchin Gururangan, Sydney Borodinsky, Tamar Herman, Tara Fowler,
Tarek Sheasha, Thomas Georgiou, Thomas Scialom, Tobias Speckbacher, Todor Mihaylov,
Tong Xiao, Ujjwal Karn, Vedanuj Goswami, Vibhor Gupta, Vignesh Ramanathan, Viktor
Kerkez, Vincent Gonguet, Virginie Do, Vish Vogeti, Vı́tor Albiero, Vladan Petrovic, Weiwei
Chu, Wenhan Xiong, Wenyin Fu, Whitney Meers, Xavier Martinet, Xiaodong Wang, Xiao-
fang Wang, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Xide Xia, Xinfeng Xie, Xuchao Jia, Xuewei Wang, Yaelle
Goldschlag, Yashesh Gaur, Yasmine Babaei, Yi Wen, Yiwen Song, Yuchen Zhang, Yue Li,
Yuning Mao, Zacharie Delpierre Coudert, Zheng Yan, Zhengxing Chen, Zoe Papakipos, Aaditya
Singh, Aayushi Srivastava, Abha Jain, Adam Kelsey, Adam Shajnfeld, Adithya Gangidi, Adolfo
Victoria, Ahuva Goldstand, Ajay Menon, Ajay Sharma, Alex Boesenberg, Alexei Baevski,
Allie Feinstein, Amanda Kallet, Amit Sangani, Amos Teo, Anam Yunus, Andrei Lupu, Andres
Alvarado, Andrew Caples, Andrew Gu, Andrew Ho, Andrew Poulton, Andrew Ryan, Ankit
Ramchandani, Annie Dong, Annie Franco, Anuj Goyal, Aparajita Saraf, Arkabandhu Chowd-
hury, Ashley Gabriel, Ashwin Bharambe, Assaf Eisenman, Azadeh Yazdan, Beau James, Ben
Maurer, Benjamin Leonhardi, Bernie Huang, Beth Loyd, Beto De Paola, Bhargavi Paranjape,
Bing Liu, Bo Wu, Boyu Ni, Braden Hancock, Bram Wasti, Brandon Spence, Brani Stojkovic,
Brian Gamido, Britt Montalvo, Carl Parker, Carly Burton, Catalina Mejia, Ce Liu, Changhan
Wang, Changkyu Kim, Chao Zhou, Chester Hu, Ching-Hsiang Chu, Chris Cai, Chris Tindal,
Christoph Feichtenhofer, Cynthia Gao, Damon Civin, Dana Beaty, Daniel Kreymer, Daniel
Li, David Adkins, David Xu, Davide Testuggine, Delia David, Devi Parikh, Diana Liskovich,
Didem Foss, Dingkang Wang, Duc Le, Dustin Holland, Edward Dowling, Eissa Jamil, Elaine
Montgomery, Eleonora Presani, Emily Hahn, Emily Wood, Eric-Tuan Le, Erik Brinkman,
Esteban Arcaute, Evan Dunbar, Evan Smothers, Fei Sun, Felix Kreuk, Feng Tian, Filippos
Kokkinos, Firat Ozgenel, Francesco Caggioni, Frank Kanayet, Frank Seide, Gabriela Medina
Florez, Gabriella Schwarz, Gada Badeer, Georgia Swee, Gil Halpern, Grant Herman, Grigory
Sizov, Guangyi, Zhang, Guna Lakshminarayanan, Hakan Inan, Hamid Shojanazeri, Han Zou,
Hannah Wang, Hanwen Zha, Haroun Habeeb, Harrison Rudolph, Helen Suk, Henry Aspe-
gren, Hunter Goldman, Hongyuan Zhan, Ibrahim Damlaj, Igor Molybog, Igor Tufanov, Ilias
Leontiadis, Irina-Elena Veliche, Itai Gat, Jake Weissman, James Geboski, James Kohli, Janice
Lam, Japhet Asher, Jean-Baptiste Gaya, Jeff Marcus, Jeff Tang, Jennifer Chan, Jenny Zhen,
Jeremy Reizenstein, Jeremy Teboul, Jessica Zhong, Jian Jin, Jingyi Yang, Joe Cummings,
Jon Carvill, Jon Shepard, Jonathan McPhie, Jonathan Torres, Josh Ginsburg, Junjie Wang,
Kai Wu, Kam Hou U, Karan Saxena, Kartikay Khandelwal, Katayoun Zand, Kathy Matosich,
Kaushik Veeraraghavan, Kelly Michelena, Keqian Li, Kiran Jagadeesh, Kun Huang, Kunal
Chawla, Kyle Huang, Lailin Chen, Lakshya Garg, Lavender A, Leandro Silva, Lee Bell, Lei
Zhang, Liangpeng Guo, Licheng Yu, Liron Moshkovich, Luca Wehrstedt, Madian Khabsa,
Manav Avalani, Manish Bhatt, Martynas Mankus, Matan Hasson, Matthew Lennie, Matthias
Reso, Maxim Groshev, Maxim Naumov, Maya Lathi, Meghan Keneally, Miao Liu, Michael L.
Seltzer, Michal Valko, Michelle Restrepo, Mihir Patel, Mik Vyatskov, Mikayel Samvelyan,

                                          18
    Mike Clark, Mike Macey, Mike Wang, Miquel Jubert Hermoso, Mo Metanat, Mohammad
    Rastegari, Munish Bansal, Nandhini Santhanam, Natascha Parks, Natasha White, Navyata
    Bawa, Nayan Singhal, Nick Egebo, Nicolas Usunier, Nikhil Mehta, Nikolay Pavlovich Laptev,
    Ning Dong, Norman Cheng, Oleg Chernoguz, Olivia Hart, Omkar Salpekar, Ozlem Kalinli,
    Parkin Kent, Parth Parekh, Paul Saab, Pavan Balaji, Pedro Rittner, Philip Bontrager, Pierre
    Roux, Piotr Dollar, Polina Zvyagina, Prashant Ratanchandani, Pritish Yuvraj, Qian Liang,
    Rachad Alao, Rachel Rodriguez, Rafi Ayub, Raghotham Murthy, Raghu Nayani, Rahul Mitra,
    Rangaprabhu Parthasarathy, Raymond Li, Rebekkah Hogan, Robin Battey, Rocky Wang, Russ
    Howes, Ruty Rinott, Sachin Mehta, Sachin Siby, Sai Jayesh Bondu, Samyak Datta, Sara Chugh,
    Sara Hunt, Sargun Dhillon, Sasha Sidorov, Satadru Pan, Saurabh Mahajan, Saurabh Verma,
    Seiji Yamamoto, Sharadh Ramaswamy, Shaun Lindsay, Shaun Lindsay, Sheng Feng, Shenghao
    Lin, Shengxin Cindy Zha, Shishir Patil, Shiva Shankar, Shuqiang Zhang, Shuqiang Zhang,
    Sinong Wang, Sneha Agarwal, Soji Sajuyigbe, Soumith Chintala, Stephanie Max, Stephen
    Chen, Steve Kehoe, Steve Satterfield, Sudarshan Govindaprasad, Sumit Gupta, Summer Deng,
    Sungmin Cho, Sunny Virk, Suraj Subramanian, Sy Choudhury, Sydney Goldman, Tal Remez,
    Tamar Glaser, Tamara Best, Thilo Koehler, Thomas Robinson, Tianhe Li, Tianjun Zhang,
    Tim Matthews, Timothy Chou, Tzook Shaked, Varun Vontimitta, Victoria Ajayi, Victoria
    Montanez, Vijai Mohan, Vinay Satish Kumar, Vishal Mangla, Vlad Ionescu, Vlad Poenaru,
    Vlad Tiberiu Mihailescu, Vladimir Ivanov, Wei Li, Wenchen Wang, Wenwen Jiang, Wes Bouaziz,
    Will Constable, Xiaocheng Tang, Xiaojian Wu, Xiaolan Wang, Xilun Wu, Xinbo Gao, Yaniv
    Kleinman, Yanjun Chen, Ye Hu, Ye Jia, Ye Qi, Yenda Li, Yilin Zhang, Ying Zhang, Yossi Adi,
    Youngjin Nam, Yu, Wang, Yu Zhao, Yuchen Hao, Yundi Qian, Yunlu Li, Yuzi He, Zach Rait,
    Zachary DeVito, Zef Rosnbrick, Zhaoduo Wen, Zhenyu Yang, Zhiwei Zhao, and Zhiyu Ma. The
    llama 3 herd of models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21783, 2024.

[49] Axel Sauer, Dominik Lorenz, Andreas Blattmann, and Robin Rombach. Adversarial diffusion
     distillation. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pages 87–103. Springer, 2024.

[50] Dustin Podell, Zion English, Kyle Lacey, Andreas Blattmann, Tim Dockhorn, Jonas Müller,
     Joe Penna, and Robin Rombach. SDXL: Improving latent diffusion models for high-resolution
     image synthesis. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.

[51] Shuai Bai, Yuxuan Cai, Ruizhe Chen, Keqin Chen, Xionghui Chen, Zesen Cheng, Lianghao
     Deng, Wei Ding, Chang Gao, Chunjiang Ge, Wenbin Ge, Zhifang Guo, Qidong Huang, Jie
     Huang, Fei Huang, Binyuan Hui, Shutong Jiang, Zhaohai Li, Mingsheng Li, Mei Li, Kaixin
     Li, Zicheng Lin, Junyang Lin, Xuejing Liu, Jiawei Liu, Chenglong Liu, Yang Liu, Dayiheng
     Liu, Shixuan Liu, Dunjie Lu, Ruilin Luo, Chenxu Lv, Rui Men, Lingchen Meng, Xuancheng
     Ren, Xingzhang Ren, Sibo Song, Yuchong Sun, Jun Tang, Jianhong Tu, Jianqiang Wan, Peng
     Wang, Pengfei Wang, Qiuyue Wang, Yuxuan Wang, Tianbao Xie, Yiheng Xu, Haiyang Xu, Jin
     Xu, Zhibo Yang, Mingkun Yang, Jianxin Yang, An Yang, Bowen Yu, Fei Zhang, Hang Zhang,
     Xi Zhang, Bo Zheng, Humen Zhong, Jingren Zhou, Fan Zhou, Jing Zhou, Yuanzhi Zhu, and
     Ke Zhu. Qwen3-vl technical report. 2025.

[52] Gemma Team, Aishwarya Kamath, Johan Ferret, Shreya Pathak, Nino Vieillard, Ramona
     Merhej, Sarah Perrin, Tatiana Matejovicova, Alexandre Ramé, Morgane Rivière, Louis Rouillard,
     Thomas Mesnard, Geoffrey Cideron, Jean bastien Grill, Sabela Ramos, Edouard Yvinec,
     Michelle Casbon, Etienne Pot, Ivo Penchev, Gaël Liu, Francesco Visin, Kathleen Kenealy,
     Lucas Beyer, Xiaohai Zhai, Anton Tsitsulin, Robert Busa-Fekete, Alex Feng, Noveen Sachdeva,
     Benjamin Coleman, Yi Gao, Basil Mustafa, Iain Barr, Emilio Parisotto, David Tian, Matan


                                                19
    Eyal, Colin Cherry, Jan-Thorsten Peter, Danila Sinopalnikov, Surya Bhupatiraju, Rishabh
    Agarwal, Mehran Kazemi, Dan Malkin, Ravin Kumar, David Vilar, Idan Brusilovsky, Jiaming
    Luo, Andreas Steiner, Abe Friesen, Abhanshu Sharma, Abheesht Sharma, Adi Mayrav Gilady,
    Adrian Goedeckemeyer, Alaa Saade, Alex Feng, Alexander Kolesnikov, Alexei Bendebury,
    Alvin Abdagic, Amit Vadi, András György, André Susano Pinto, Anil Das, Ankur Bapna,
    Antoine Miech, Antoine Yang, Antonia Paterson, Ashish Shenoy, Ayan Chakrabarti, Bilal
    Piot, Bo Wu, Bobak Shahriari, Bryce Petrini, Charlie Chen, Charline Le Lan, Christopher A.
    Choquette-Choo, CJ Carey, Cormac Brick, Daniel Deutsch, Danielle Eisenbud, Dee Cattle,
    Derek Cheng, Dimitris Paparas, Divyashree Shivakumar Sreepathihalli, Doug Reid, Dustin
    Tran, Dustin Zelle, Eric Noland, Erwin Huizenga, Eugene Kharitonov, Frederick Liu, Gagik
    Amirkhanyan, Glenn Cameron, Hadi Hashemi, Hanna Klimczak-Plucińska, Harman Singh,
    Harsh Mehta, Harshal Tushar Lehri, Hussein Hazimeh, Ian Ballantyne, Idan Szpektor, Ivan
    Nardini, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Jetha Chan, Joe Stanton, John Wieting, Jonathan Lai, Jordi
    Orbay, Joseph Fernandez, Josh Newlan, Ju yeong Ji, Jyotinder Singh, Kat Black, Kathy Yu,
    Kevin Hui, Kiran Vodrahalli, Klaus Greff, Linhai Qiu, Marcella Valentine, Marina Coelho,
    Marvin Ritter, Matt Hoffman, Matthew Watson, Mayank Chaturvedi, Michael Moynihan, Min
    Ma, Nabila Babar, Natasha Noy, Nathan Byrd, Nick Roy, Nikola Momchev, Nilay Chauhan,
    Noveen Sachdeva, Oskar Bunyan, Pankil Botarda, Paul Caron, Paul Kishan Rubenstein, Phil
    Culliton, Philipp Schmid, Pier Giuseppe Sessa, Pingmei Xu, Piotr Stanczyk, Pouya Tafti,
    Rakesh Shivanna, Renjie Wu, Renke Pan, Reza Rokni, Rob Willoughby, Rohith Vallu, Ryan
    Mullins, Sammy Jerome, Sara Smoot, Sertan Girgin, Shariq Iqbal, Shashir Reddy, Shruti
    Sheth, Siim Põder, Sijal Bhatnagar, Sindhu Raghuram Panyam, Sivan Eiger, Susan Zhang,
    Tianqi Liu, Trevor Yacovone, Tyler Liechty, Uday Kalra, Utku Evci, Vedant Misra, Vincent
    Roseberry, Vlad Feinberg, Vlad Kolesnikov, Woohyun Han, Woosuk Kwon, Xi Chen, Yinlam
    Chow, Yuvein Zhu, Zichuan Wei, Zoltan Egyed, Victor Cotruta, Minh Giang, Phoebe Kirk,
    Anand Rao, Kat Black, Nabila Babar, Jessica Lo, Erica Moreira, Luiz Gustavo Martins, Omar
    Sanseviero, Lucas Gonzalez, Zach Gleicher, Tris Warkentin, Vahab Mirrokni, Evan Senter, Eli
    Collins, Joelle Barral, Zoubin Ghahramani, Raia Hadsell, Yossi Matias, D. Sculley, Slav Petrov,
    Noah Fiedel, Noam Shazeer, Oriol Vinyals, Jeff Dean, Demis Hassabis, Koray Kavukcuoglu,
    Clement Farabet, Elena Buchatskaya, Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Rohan Anil, Dmitry, Lepikhin,
    Sebastian Borgeaud, Olivier Bachem, Armand Joulin, Alek Andreev, Cassidy Hardin, Robert
    Dadashi, and Léonard Hussenot. Gemma 3 technical report, 2025.

[53] discus0434.     Aesthetic predictor         v2.5.        https://github.com/discus0434/
     aesthetic-predictor-v2-5, 2024.

[54] G. Richard Bickerton, Gaia V. Paolini, Jérémy Besnard, Sorel Muresan, and Andrew L. Hopkins.
     Quantifying the chemical beauty of drugs. Nature Chemistry, 4(2):90–98, 2012.

[55] Peter Ertl and Ansgar Schuffenhauer. Estimation of synthetic accessibility score of drug-like
     molecules based on molecular complexity and fragment contributions. Journal of Cheminfor-
     matics, 1(1):8, 2009.

[56] An Yang, Anfeng Li, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chang
     Gao, Chengen Huang, Chenxu Lv, Chujie Zheng, Dayiheng Liu, Fan Zhou, Fei Huang, Feng
     Hu, Hao Ge, Haoran Wei, Huan Lin, Jialong Tang, Jian Yang, Jianhong Tu, Jianwei Zhang,
     Jianxin Yang, Jiaxi Yang, Jing Zhou, Jingren Zhou, Junyang Lin, Kai Dang, Keqin Bao, Kexin
     Yang, Le Yu, Lianghao Deng, Mei Li, Mingfeng Xue, Mingze Li, Pei Zhang, Peng Wang, Qin
     Zhu, Rui Men, Ruize Gao, Shixuan Liu, Shuang Luo, Tianhao Li, Tianyi Tang, Wenbiao Yin,


                                                20
    Xingzhang Ren, Xinyu Wang, Xinyu Zhang, Xuancheng Ren, Yang Fan, Yang Su, Yichang
    Zhang, Yinger Zhang, Yu Wan, Yuqiong Liu, Zekun Wang, Zeyu Cui, Zhenru Zhang, Zhipeng
    Zhou, and Zihan Qiu. Qwen3 technical report, 2025.
[57] Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser,
     Matthias Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, Christopher Hesse, and
     John Schulman. Training verifiers to solve math word problems, 2021.
[58] Ahmad Beirami, Alekh Agarwal, Jonathan Berant, Alexander Nicholas D’Amour, Jacob
     Eisenstein, Chirag Nagpal, and Ananda Theertha Suresh. Theoretical guarantees on the
     best-of-n alignment policy. In Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning,
     2025.
[59] Leo Gao, John Schulman, and Jacob Hilton. Scaling laws for reward model overoptimization.
     In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 202 of
     Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 10835–10866. PMLR, 2023.
[60] Diederik M Roijers, Peter Vamplew, Shimon Whiteson, and Richard Dazeley. A survey of
     multi-objective sequential decision-making. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 48:
     67–113, 2013.
[61] Conor F. Hayes, Roxana Rădulescu, Eugenio Bargiacchi, Johan Källström, Matthew Macfarlane,
     Mathieu Reymond, Timothy Verstraeten, Luisa M. Zintgraf, Richard Dazeley, Fredrik Heintz,
     Enda Howley, Athirai A. Irissappane, Patrick Mannion, Ann Nowé, Gabriel Ramos, Marcello
     Restelli, Peter Vamplew, and Diederik M. Roijers. A practical guide to multi-objective
     reinforcement learning and planning. Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems, 36(1):26,
     2022.
[62] Zihao Wang, Chirag Nagpal, Jonathan Berant, Jacob Eisenstein, Alexander Nicholas D’Amour,
     Sanmi Koyejo, and Victor Veitch. Transforming and combining rewards for aligning large
     language models. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning,
     pages 51161–51176, 2024.
[63] Alisa Liu, Maarten Sap, Ximing Lu, Swabha Swayamdipta, Chandra Bhagavatula, Noah A.
     Smith, and Yejin Choi. DExperts: Decoding-time controlled text generation with experts and
     anti-experts. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
     Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing
     (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 6691–6706. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2021.
[64] Lianhui Qin, Sean Welleck, Daniel Khashabi, and Yejin Choi. COLD decoding: Energy-based
     constrained text generation with langevin dynamics. In Advances in Neural Information
     Processing Systems, 2022.
[65] Haikang Deng and Colin Raffel. Reward-augmented decoding: Efficient controlled text genera-
     tion with a unidirectional reward model. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical
     Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 11781–11791. Association for Computational
     Linguistics, 2023.
[66] Sidharth Mudgal, Jong Lee, Harish Ganapathy, YaGuang Li, Tao Wang, Yanping Huang,
     Zhifeng Chen, Heng-Tze Cheng, Michael Collins, Trevor Strohman, Jilin Chen, Alex Beutel,
     and Ahmad Beirami. Controlled decoding from language models. In Forty-first International
     Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.

                                               21
[67] Mark A Beaumont. Estimation of population growth or decline in genetically monitored
     populations. Genetics, 164(3):1139–1160, 2003.

[68] Christophe Andrieu and Gareth O. Roberts. The pseudo-marginal approach for efficient monte
     carlo computations. The Annals of Statistics, 37(2):697–725, 2009.

[69] Iain Murray, Zoubin Ghahramani, and David J. C. MacKay. MCMC for doubly-intractable
     distributions. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Second Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial
     Intelligence, page 359–366, Arlington, Virginia, USA, 2006.

[70] Flávio B. Gonçalves, Krzysztof Latuszyński, and Gareth O. Roberts. Barker’s algorithm for
     Bayesian inference with intractable likelihoods. Brazilian Journal of Probability and Statistics,
     31(4):732 – 745, 2017.

[71] Dootika Vats, Flávio B Gonçalves, K Latuszyński, and Gareth O Roberts. Efficient bernoulli
     factory markov chain monte carlo for intractable posteriors. Biometrika, 109(2):369–385, 2022.

[72] Daniel M Ziegler, Nisan Stiennon, Jeffrey Wu, Tom B Brown, Alec Radford, Dario Amodei,
     Paul Christiano, and Geoffrey Irving. Fine-tuning language models from human preferences.
     arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.08593, 2019.

[73] Yang Liu, Dan Iter, Yichong Xu, Shuohang Wang, Ruochen Xu, and Chenguang Zhu. G-eval:
     NLG evaluation using gpt-4 with better human alignment. In Proceedings of the 2023 conference
     on empirical methods in natural language processing, pages 2511–2522, 2023.

[74] Yinhong Liu, Han Zhou, Zhijiang Guo, Ehsan Shareghi, Ivan Vulić, Anna Korhonen, and Nigel
     Collier. Aligning with human judgement: The role of pairwise preference in large language
     model evaluators. In First Conference on Language Modeling, 2024.

[75] Wei-Lin Chiang, Lianmin Zheng, Ying Sheng, Anastasios N. Angelopoulos, Tianle Li, Dacheng
     Li, Banghua Zhu, Hao Zhang, Michael I. Jordan, Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica. Chatbot
     arena: an open platform for evaluating llms by human preference. In Proceedings of the 41st
     International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.

[76] Weizhe Yuan, Richard Yuanzhe Pang, Kyunghyun Cho, Xian Li, Sainbayar Sukhbaatar, Jing
     Xu, and Jason Weston. Self-rewarding language models. In Proceedings of the 41st International
     Conference on Machine Learning. JMLR.org, 2024.

[77] Aman Madaan, Niket Tandon, Prakhar Gupta, Skyler Hallinan, Luyu Gao, Sarah Wiegreffe, Uri
     Alon, Nouha Dziri, Shrimai Prabhumoye, Yiming Yang, Shashank Gupta, Bodhisattwa Prasad
     Majumder, Katherine Hermann, Sean Welleck, Amir Yazdanbakhsh, and Peter Clark. Self-refine:
     Iterative refinement with self-feedback. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information
     Processing Systems, 2023.

[78] Ning Miao, Yee Whye Teh, and Tom Rainforth. Selfcheck: Using LLMs to zero-shot check
     their own step-by-step reasoning. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning
     Representations, 2024.

[79] Simon L Cotter, Gareth O Roberts, Andrew M Stuart, and David White. Mcmc methods for
     functions: modifying old algorithms to make them faster. Statistical Science, pages 424–446,
     2013.



                                                 22
[80] Barbara Zdrazil, Eloy Felix, Fiona Hunter, Emma J Manners, James Blackshaw, Sybilla Corbett,
     Marleen de Veij, Harris Ioannidis, David Mendez Lopez, Juan F Mosquera, Maria Paula
     Magarinos, Nicolas Bosc, Ricardo Arcila, Tevfik Kizilören, Anna Gaulton, A Patrı́cia Bento,
     Melissa F Adasme, Peter Monecke, Gregory A Landrum, and Andrew R Leach. The chembl
     database in 2023: a drug discovery platform spanning multiple bioactivity data types and time
     periods. Nucleic Acids Research, 52(D1):D1180–D1192, 2024.

[81] Tom Kocmi, Eleftherios Avramidis, Rachel Bawden, Ondřej Bojar, Anton Dvorkovich, Christian
     Federmann, Mark Fishel, Markus Freitag, Thamme Gowda, Roman Grundkiewicz, Barry
     Haddow, Philipp Koehn, Benjamin Marie, Christof Monz, Makoto Morishita, Kenton Murray,
     Masaaki Nagata, Toshiaki Nakazawa, Martin Popel, Maja Popović, Mariya Shmatova, and Jun
     Suzuki. Findings of the 2023 conference on machine translation (WMT23): LLMs are here but
     not quite there yet. In Proceedings of the Eighth Conference on Machine Translation, pages
     1–42. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2023.

[82] Duarte Miguel Alves, José Pombal, Nuno M Guerreiro, Pedro Henrique Martins, João Alves,
     Amin Farajian, Ben Peters, Ricardo Rei, Patrick Fernandes, Sweta Agrawal, Pierre Colombo,
     José G. C. de Souza, and Andre Martins. Tower: An open multilingual large language model
     for translation-related tasks. In First Conference on Language Modeling, 2024.

[83] An Yang, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chengyuan Li,
     Dayiheng Liu, Fei Huang, Haoran Wei, Huan Lin, Jian Yang, Jianhong Tu, Jianwei Zhang,
     Jianxin Yang, Jiaxi Yang, Jingren Zhou, Junyang Lin, Kai Dang, Keming Lu, Keqin Bao,
     Kexin Yang, Le Yu, Mei Li, Mingfeng Xue, Pei Zhang, Qin Zhu, Rui Men, Runji Lin, Tianhao
     Li, Tianyi Tang, Tingyu Xia, Xingzhang Ren, Xuancheng Ren, Yang Fan, Yang Su, Yichang
     Zhang, Yu Wan, Yuqiong Liu, Zeyu Cui, Zhenru Zhang, and Zihan Qiu. Qwen2.5 technical
     report, 2024.

[84] Ricardo Rei, Nuno M. Guerreiro, José Pombal, Daan van Stigt, Marcos Treviso, Luisa Coheur,
     José G. C. de Souza, and André F. T. Martins. Scaling up CometKiwi: Unbabel-IST 2023
     submission for the quality estimation shared task. In Proceedings of the Eighth Conference on
     Machine Translation, 2023.

[85] Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-Jing Zhu. Bleu: a method for automatic
     evaluation of machine translation. In Proceedings of the 40th Annual Meeting of the Association
     for Computational Linguistics, 2002.

[86] Maja Popović. chrF: character n-gram F-score for automatic MT evaluation. In Proceedings of
     the Tenth Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, 2015.

[87] Matthew Snover, Bonnie Dorr, Rich Schwartz, Linnea Micciulla, and John Makhoul. A study
     of translation edit rate with targeted human annotation. In Proceedings of the 7th Conference
     of the Association for Machine Translation in the Americas: Technical Papers, 2006.

[88] Matt Post. A call for clarity in reporting BLEU scores. In Proceedings of the Third Conference
     on Machine Translation: Research Papers, 2018.

[89] Nuno M. Guerreiro, Ricardo Rei, Daan van Stigt, Luisa Coheur, Pierre Colombo, and André
     F. T. Martins. xCOMET: Transparent machine translation evaluation through fine-grained
     error detection. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 12:979–995,
     2024.

                                                23
[90] Morris H DeGroot. Unbiased sequential estimation for binomial populations. The Annals of
     Mathematical Statistics, pages 80–101, 1959.

[91] Erich Leo Lehmann and George Casella. Theory of point estimation. Springer, 1998.

[92] Luis Mendo. Estimating odds and log odds with guaranteed accuracy. Statistical Papers, 66(1):
     26, 2025.




                                               24
A     Additional Related Work

Inference-time guided generation. The need to generate content that satisfies specified
properties has motivated methods for user-guided inference. A natural approach, known as best-
of-N , generates multiple outputs from a base model and selects the candidate that maximizes a
learned reward, verifier score, or preference-model score [57, 58]. While such procedures can induce
a sampling policy, they are typically used to return a single selected output per query rather than
to sample from an explicitly specified conditional distribution. Furthermore, their reliance on proxy
rewards makes guidance indirect and susceptible to overoptimization risks [59]. Accommodating
multiple desired properties also requires additional design choices, such as scalarizing, transforming,
or combining multiple objectives or reward models [60–62]. A different class of methods uses
controlled decoding to steer the generative process. Examples include plug-and-play generation
with attribute classifiers [14], future-discriminator guidance [15], generative-discriminator guidance
[16], expert/anti-expert decoding [63], energy-based constrained decoding [64], reward-augmented
decoding [65], and prefix-scorer based controlled decoding [66]. These approaches offer some degree
of distributional control, but they rely on pointwise scores, classifiers, reward models, or learned
prefix scorers for providing guidance. Our approach differs in three key respects: (i) it explicitly
aims to sample from the generative distribution conditioned on the desired property as defined by
a judge, (ii) it supports guidance via pairwise-comparison judgments, and (iii) it admits rigorous
convergence guarantees.


MCMC from inexact inputs. Our approach relates to an established line of research in the
sampling literature. This field concerns MCMC methods for settings in which the ideal MH
acceptance ratio cannot be evaluated exactly, but one still wants to target the desired distribution
exactly. Pseudo-marginal methods achieve this by running MH on an augmented state space,
replacing the intractable unnormalized target density or likelihood with a nonnegative unbiased
estimator [67, 68]. Related exchange algorithms for doubly intractable distributions introduce
auxiliary draws so that parameter-dependent normalizing constants cancel from the acceptance ratio
[69]. Bernoulli-factory MCMC instead constructs the accept/reject decision directly from random
coins, rather than first estimating the full acceptance probability [70, 71]. We follow a similar yet
distinct philosophy: rather than constructing an unbiased likelihood estimator or evaluating an
intractable pointwise ratio, we construct the accept/reject decision directly from stochastic pairwise
comparisons, in a way that preserves the target distribution exactly for any fixed comparison budget.


Preference learning and LLM judges. Pairwise comparisons have become ubiquitous in the
generative modeling literature. Human preferences elicited through pairwise feedback are routinely
used for model alignment, either through learned reward models [21–24, 72] or directly through
preference-optimization objectives [25]. Recently, LLMs have also become widely used as judges for
evaluating and comparing model outputs, either through direct scoring or rubric-based evaluation
[26, 73] or through pairwise preference-based evaluation and leaderboards [74, 75]. Our approach is
different: we use a model’s comparative judgments to guide generation through an exact sampling
procedure. Conceptually, this connects to work on self-rewarding, self-evaluation, and self-refinement
in language models [76–78]. However, rather than relying on prompting, in-context learning, or
iterative self-improvement, our approach steers the generative process via a principled conditional
sampling procedure. It also enables one model to guide another, as well as guidance along multiple
preference dimensions. This represents, to our knowledge, a novel perspective on model preferences.


                                                  25
B     Multi-judge Pref-MH with Exact N -vote Acceptance Algorithm

Algorithm 2 Multi-judge Pref-MH with exact N -vote acceptance
Require: Initial state x(0) ∈ X , proposal kernel q(· | x), judges J1 , . . . , Jm , comparisons per judge
    N ≥ 1, iterations T
 1: for t = 0, 1, . . . , T − 1 do
 2:    Propose x′ ∼ q(· | x(t) )
                                                                                            (1)        (N )
 3:    For i = 1, . . . , m, query Ji independently N times on (x(t) , x′ ), and obtain Ji , . . . , Ji .
                    PN (l)
 4:    Set Ki = l=1 Ji , and compute
                                                   (                                              )
                                                         p  (x′ ) q(x(t) | x′ )            K
                                                          0                                  i
                      x′ ,                                                      · m
                                                                                 Q
                                with probability min 1,                             i=1               ,
          x(t+1) =                                      p0 (x(t) ) q(x′ | x(t) )        N − Ki + 1
                      
                       (t)
                          x , otherwise.

 5: return the trajectory x(0) , x(1) , . . . , x(T )




C     Experimental Details and Additional Results

This appendix provides the complete experimental setups underlying the experiments in the main
text, together with additional quantitative and qualitative results.


C.1     Synthetic validation

The synthetic experiment provides a controlled test of the central theoretical claim in Section 4.1.
Here the target distribution is known exactly, allowing us to verify whether a sampler based only on
binary comparison outcomes converges to the intended stationary distribution. At the same time,
the construction is deliberately nontrivial: the base distribution is non-uniform, the target contains
several separated modes, and the sampler must account for both the preference-induced tilt and the
base-density ratio.


Experimental setup.           The state space is the finite set X = {0, 1, . . . , 240}.
We define the non-uniform base distribution
                                                     n          2 o
                                                 exp − 21 k−68
                                                             56
                                      p0 (k) = P        n            o.
                                                240        1 ℓ−68 2
                                                ℓ=0 exp  − 2    56
                                                            n                   o
                                                                        k−a 2
To construct the preference-induced tilt, let ga,τ (k) = exp − 12
                                                                           
                                                                         τ          , and define the latent score
        5
s(k) = 240 k + 0.9 g60,13 (k) + 0.7 g130,21 (k) + 1.0 g200,13 (k).
The resulting target distribution is
                                                 p0 (k) exp(s(k))
                                         π(k) = P240                  .
                                                 ℓ=0 p0 (ℓ) exp(s(ℓ))


                                                        26
Although this target is available for evaluation, neither Pref-MH nor the plug-in baseline is given
direct access to s(k) or π(k) when making accept/reject decisions.
For a proposed move from k to k ′ , the synthetic judge follows the Bradley–Terry model
                                                                             1
                       pJ (k ≺ k ′ ) = σ s(k ′ ) − s(k) ,
                                                       
                                                              σ(u) =               .
                                                                       1 + exp(−u)

Given a comparison budget N , we draw K ∼ Binomial (N, pJ (k ≺ k ′ )) , where K is the number of
votes favoring the proposal.
All methods use the same symmetric proposal. With probability γ = 0.88, we draw a global
proposal uniformly from {0, . . . , 240}; with probability 1 − γ = 0.12, we use a local nearest-neighbor
move. For an interior state 1 ≤ k ≤ 239: L(k | k) = 12 , L(k − 1 | k) = L(k + 1 | k) = 14 . At the
boundaries, probability mass that would leave the state space is kept at the current state, so that:
L(0 | 0) = 34 , L(1 | 0) = 14 , and analogously, L(240 | 240) = 34 , L(239 | 240) = 14 . The full proposal is
therefore q(k ′ | k) = γ Unif{0, . . . , 240}(k ′ ) + (1 − γ)L(k ′ | k). Since q is symmetric, the proposal
ratio cancels and
                                                             p0 (k ′ )
                                              r0 (k, k ′ ) =           .
                                                             p0 (k)

Sampling methods. We compare three samplers that share the same proposal kernel. Oracle
MH has direct access to the latent score and accepts according to

                                                      p0 (k ′ ) exp(s(k ′ ))
                                                                            
                                          ′
                             αoracle (k, k ) = min 1,                          .
                                                       p0 (k) exp(s(k))

This sampler is unavailable in the preference-only setting, but provides a reference for the behavior
of a valid chain targeting π.
Pref-MH instead uses only the N binary judge outcomes. Given K ∼ Binomial(N, pJ (k ≺ k ′ )), it
accepts with probability

                                                 p0 (k ′ )
                                                                 
                                  ′                        K
                          αN (k, k ; K) = min 1,                    .
                                                 p0 (k) N − K + 1

We evaluate N ∈ {1, 2, 4}.
Finally, Plug-in uses the same N judge votes but replaces the exact vote-based construction with
the empirical win-rate odds. For 0 < K < N , it forms

                                                  K/N        K
                                   b k′ ) =
                                   w(k,                  =      ,
                                               (N − K)/N   N −K

and accepts according to

                                                           p0 (k ′ ) K
                                                                          
                                          ′
                              αplug-in (k, k ; K) = min 1,                     .
                                                           p0 (k) N − K

For K = 0 and K = N , we set the acceptance probability to 0 and 1, respectively. As established
by Theorem 1, this natural plug-in construction is not guaranteed to preserve the desired target.




                                                     27
                                     0.014            Oracle MH
                                                      Pref-MH
                                     0.012            (invalid) plug-in



                      Probability mass
                                     0.010            Target
                                     0.008
                                     0.006
                                     0.004
                                     0.002
                                     0.000
                                             0         50         100      150         200
                                                                  Value of k
Figure 5: Synthetic target distribution and empirical samples. We compare the true target
distribution over k ∈ {0, . . . , 240} with the empirical distributions obtained by Oracle MH, Pref-MH,
and the invalid plug-in sampler. The preference-based methods use N = 2 judge votes per proposal.


Evaluation and results. All chains are initialized at k = 0 and run for 150,000 MH steps.
Because our goal is to display convergence from a common nonstationary initialization, we do not
discard burn-in samples in the convergence plot. Every 500 steps, we compute the cumulative
empirical distribution
                                               t
                                             1X
                                    π
                                    bt (k) =      1{Xr = k},
                                             t
                                                                 r=1

and report its total variation distance from the true target,
                                                                  240
                                                                1X
                                                 TV(b
                                                    πt , π) =      |b
                                                                    πt (k) − π(k)| .
                                                                2
                                                                 k=0

This is the quantity shown in Figure 2. To make the limiting behavior directly visible, we also run
the methods with N = 2 and compare their empirical state distributions with the exact target in
Figure 5.
The experiment isolates the effect of the accept/reject construction: the BT model is exactly satisfied
and the target is known. As expected, both Oracle MH and Pref-MH continue to approach the true
target, with Pref-MH doing so using only a fixed number of binary comparisons at each transition.
The plug-in sampler receives exactly the same comparison budget, but its TV distance plateaus
away from zero. This separation illustrates the practical consequence of the impossibility result:
even under a correctly specified comparison model, replacing the exact construction by an empirical
odds estimate can change the stationary distribution.


C.2    Multi-condition text generation

We next provide the complete setup for the open-ended text experiment in Section 4.2. The
purpose of this experiment is twofold. First, it tests whether preference-based MH can steer a
language-model distribution toward several subjective properties at once. Second, it compares two

                                                                  28
ways of representing a multi-condition target: a collection of property-specific judges and a single
judge asked to assess the full conjunction.


Experimental setup. The task is to generate the opening paragraph of a short story. Each
input is a short scenario description, such as “a weary traveler arriving at a deserted inn just after
midnight.” The base model receives the neutral system prompt

     You are a fiction writer. Respond with only the requested opening paragraph of a story. Do not
     add explanations, bullet points, titles, or meta-commentary.

The neutral wording is intentional: it prevents the base generator from being directly instructed to
satisfy the hidden evaluation criteria. We use 50 scenario prompts, limit each opening to at most
192 new tokens, and sample at temperature 0.9.
The target contains three stylistic properties: M1 is elevated literary language, M2 is a gothic or
dramatic atmosphere, and M3 is frequent direct dialogue. In the separate-judge variants, each
property is handled by its own judge; in the joint variants, one judge is asked to assess all three
properties simultaneously.
We use Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct as the base distribution p0 , as the judge, and as the held-out evaluator,
with distinct prompts for the three roles.
The proposal combines global refreshes with local suffix regeneration. With probability 0.10, we
draw a fresh independent opening from p0 . Otherwise, we sample a cut point uniformly from the
full generation limit, retain the current prefix up to that point, and ask the base model to regenerate
the remaining suffix conditional on both the original scenario and the retained prefix (inspired by
[43]). If the selected cut point lies beyond the end of the current response, the proposal is identical
to the current state. Conditional on the selected move type and cut point, the base-model proposal
factor cancels with the corresponding base-distribution ratio. The acceptance decision therefore
depends only on the judge terms.


Sampling methods. We compare five methods. Base LLM draws directly from the neutral base
model and applies no accept/reject correction. It therefore measures what the unconditioned
generator produces without being told the target properties.
The two preference-based methods differ only in how the target is decomposed. Pref-MH (sep.)
uses one pairwise judge for each property. For every proposal x′ from the current state x, judge
i is queried N = 3 times and Ki records the number of votes favoring the proposal. Since the
proposal/base ratio cancels, the acceptance probability is
                                                            3
                                                        (                )
                                 ′
                                                            Y    Ki
                       αsep (x, x ; K1 , K2 , K3 ) = min 1,                .
                                                              N − Ki + 1
                                                            i=1

Pref-MH (joint) instead uses a single pairwise judge prompted to assess the three properties
jointly. If K of the N = 3 votes favor the proposal, it accepts according to
                                                                   
                                         ′                   K
                             αjoint (x, x ; K) = min 1,               .
                                                         N −K +1

The pointwise baselines mirror the same decomposition while replacing binary comparisons with
absolute ratings. In Pointwise-MH (sep.), each of the three judges assigns an integer score from 1

                                                  29
Table 2: Multi-condition text generation results. Pointwise scores are normalized to [0, 1] and
reported as mean ± standard deviation over evaluated samples. BT columns report Bradley–Terry
coefficients fitted from pairwise comparisons for each criterion. Higher is better for all metrics.
                                           Pointwise score                           BT coefficient
 Method
                            Elevated           Gothic          Dialogue       Elevated   Gothic   Dialogue
 Base LLM                  0.801 ± 0.009    0.744 ± 0.111     0.552 ± 0.161   −0.841     −0.902   −0.413
 Pointwise-MH (sep.)       0.803 ± 0.018    0.767 ± 0.089     0.585 ± 0.161   −0.361     −0.474   −0.161
 Pointwise-MH (joint)      0.802 ± 0.015    0.751 ± 0.107     0.564 ± 0.160   −0.675     −0.758   −0.504
 Pref-MH (joint)           0.810 ± 0.030    0.786 ± 0.091     0.610 ± 0.174    0.295     0.320    −0.012
 Pref-MH (sep.)           0.817 ± 0.037    0.797 ± 0.065     0.693 ± 0.147    0.703      0.755    0.639


to 10, which is normalized to [0, 1]. Writing si (x) for the normalized score under property i, the
proposal is accepted with probability
                                                        3
                                            (                                 !)
                                                       X
                                    ′                           ′
                                                                            
                      αabs,sep (x, x ) = min 1, exp        si (x ) − si (x)      .
                                                         i=1

Pointwise-MH (joint) uses a single absolute-score judge for the full conjunction. If sjoint (x)
denotes its score, the acceptance probability is
                        αabs,joint (x, x′ ) = min 1, exp sjoint (x′ ) − sjoint (x) .
                                                                                 


Evaluation and results. For each prompt and each MH method, the chain is initialized with a
direct sample from the base model and run for 300 steps. We discard the first 50 states as burn-in
and retain the final 50 states for evaluation, without additional thinning.
We evaluate the resulting openings using both pointwise and pairwise judgments. For pointwise
evaluation, a held-out prompt asks the evaluator to score elevated language, gothic atmosphere, direct
dialogue, and overall quality on a 1–10 scale. For pairwise evaluation, the evaluator compares outputs
from different methods head-to-head for each individual property. We then fit a Bradley–Terry
model to these binary comparisons and report the resulting BT coefficients. Figure 3 normalizes
each criterion across methods for visualization only; Table 2 reports the underlying values.
The unnormalized results support the same conclusion as the radar plot. Pref-MH (sep.) performs
best under every reported pointwise and pairwise criterion. The advantage over Pref-MH (joint) is
especially pronounced for dialogue, suggesting that a judge asked to evaluate a complex conjunction
may provide a less discriminative signal than several property-specific judges. Both preference-based
variants also outperform their pointwise counterparts, indicating that the improvement is not
explained by the use of MH alone, but by the comparative evaluation signal used to define the
accept/reject decisions.


C.3    Image generation in continuous space

The image experiment demonstrates that Pref-MH is not tied to discrete sequence spaces. Here
the Markov chain evolves in the continuous latent space of a diffusion model, while all semantic
decisions are made by vision-language judges applied to the decoded images. The experiment also
tests the multi-judge construction in a setting where prompting alone often produces only a subset
of the requested visual attributes.

                                                   30
Experimental setup. The state of the chain is a latent noise tensor z. We use SDXL-Turbo
[49, 50] as the base text-to-image model and decode each latent state using the fixed prompt

     A macro photograph of a glass terrarium interior: a bright orange salamander climbing on a
     piece of grey driftwood, a small turquoise butterfly flying in the terrarium, and a red mushroom
     with white spots growing at the base near soil.

Images are generated at resolution 512 × 512. Since SDXL-Turbo maps Gaussian latent noise to
images, the base distribution over states is the standard Gaussian prior, p0 = N (0, I).
The three semantic properties are
                             M1 = orange salamander on grey driftwood,
                             M2 = turquoise butterfly flying in the scene,
                        M3 = red mushroom with white spots near the soil.
We use Qwen3-VL-8B-Instruct [51] as the judge. Each property is assigned a separate judge prompt,
and each judge is instructed to focus only on its own criterion rather than on the remaining objects
or general image aesthetics.
Both MH methods use the same fixed mixture of a local pCN move, a wider pCN move, and an
independent refresh:
                  q(z ′ | z) = 0.6 qlocal (z ′ | z) + 0.3 qwide (z ′ | z) + 0.1 qrefresh (z ′ | z).
The local and wide components are preconditioned Crank–Nicolson (pCN) proposals [79],
                                p
                           z ′ = 1 − β 2 z + βξ,    ξ ∼ N (0, I),
with β = 0.08 and β = 0.25, respectively. The refresh component draws z ′ ∼ N (0, I). Each
component is reversible with respect to the Gaussian prior, and a fixed mixture preserves this
reversibility. Consequently,
                                                p0 (z ′ )q(z | z ′ )
                                 r0 (z, z ′ ) =                      = 1.
                                                p0 (z)q(z ′ | z)

Sampling methods. The Base method consists of independent latent draws from N (0, I) decoded
with the same target-property prompt. It therefore tests whether direct prompting is sufficient to
satisfy the three visual constraints without any sampling correction.
For Pref-MH, each of the three judges compares the current and proposed images. Candidate order
is randomized before every comparison to reduce position bias. We query each judge N = 9 times
and let Ki denote the number of votes favoring the proposal under criterion i. Since r0 (z, z ′ ) = 1,
the proposal is accepted with probability
                                                             3
                                                         (                )
                                  ′
                                                             Y    Ki
                       αPref (z, z ; K1 , K2 , K3 ) = min 1,                .
                                                               N − Ki + 1
                                                                    i=1

Pointwise-MH uses the same proposal and the same three criteria, but replaces each pairwise
judge with an absolute VLM score from 0 to 10, which is normalized to [0, 1]. If si (z) denotes the
normalized score assigned to the image decoded from z, then
                                                   3
                                           (                              !)
                                                   X
                                   ′                        ′
                                                                        
                       αpoint (z, z ) = min 1, exp     si (z ) − si (z)      .
                                                              i=1


                                                         31
                                           Base   Pointwise-MH   Pref-MH




                               Step 300
                               Step 600
                               Step 900
                               Step 1200
                               Step 1500
                               Step 1800
                               Step 2100
                               Step 2400
                               Step 2700
                               Step 3000




Figure 6:     Additional image-generation trajectory samples. Columns show Base,
Pointwise-MH, and Pref-MH from left to right; rows show samples every 300 steps from step
300 to step 3000.


Evaluation and results. We run each MH chain for 3000 steps. The main-text comparison
reports samples from steps 300, 1200, 1800, and 2700. To show how the methods behave throughout
the trajectory rather than only at a few selected states, we additionally save samples every 300
steps. These trajectories are presented in Figure 6.


                                                    32
In addition to this qualitative trajectory visualization, we perform an automated quantitative
evaluation using models that are separate from the Qwen3-VL judges used during sampling. To
measure simultaneous adherence to the three desired visual conditions, we use Gemma-3-12B-IT [52]
as a VLM classifier and report the fraction of images in which all three target objects are detected.
We additionally evaluate overall visual quality using Aesthetic Predictor V2.5 [53]. Neither evaluator
is used by any method during sampling.
The quantitative results reinforce the qualitative trajectories. Pref-MH satisfies all three desired
object constraints in 63.6% of evaluated images, compared with only 7.4% for Pointwise-MH and
4.5% for the base model. At the same time, the average aesthetic scores remain comparable across
methods, with Pref-MH obtaining a slightly higher mean score. Together with the trajectory samples
in Figure 6, these results illustrate that the preference-based construction can operate directly over
a continuous latent space and combine several specialized semantic judges without collapsing them
into a single pointwise score.


C.4    De novo molecular design

We provide additional details for the molecular-design experiment in Section 4.4. This experiment
tests whether pairwise feedback can provide a useful guidance signal for molecular generation
when the desired notion of quality is difficult to capture through a small collection of explicit
cheminformatics scores.


Experimental setup. We follow the molecular-generation setup of MARS [11]. The state space
consists of valid molecules represented as SMILES, and proposals modify the current molecule through
local fragment additions and deletions. The fragment vocabulary is derived from ChEMBL [80] and
contains 1,000 fragments with at most 10 heavy atoms. All chains are initialized from x(0) = CC,
and generated molecules are restricted to at most 40 heavy atoms.
For the LLM-guided methods, we use Qwen3-235B-A22B-Instruct-2507 [56] to assess how promising a
molecule is for medicinal-chemistry follow-up. The evaluation considers general medicinal-chemistry
factors such as drug-likeness, synthetic accessibility, developability, and potentially problematic
chemical motifs.


Sampling methods.       The MARS baseline is guided by QED and synthetic accessibility. Specifically,
we use
                                    1h                                  i
                      sMARS (x) =     min{QED(x), 0.7} + min{SA(x),
                                                             f      0.7} ,
                                    2
where SA(x)
        f     = (10 − SA(x))/9 rescales synthetic accessibility so that larger values correspond to
easier synthesis. A valid proposal is accepted according to
                                       (                          )
                                                      sMARS (x′ ) β
                                                    
                             ′                   ′
                  αMARS (x, x ) = min 1, r0 (x, x )                  ,     β = 30,
                                                      sMARS (x)

where β = 30 is the default value used by MARS [11].
For Pref-MH, the judge compares the current and proposed molecules using N = 8 binary votes. To
mitigate positional bias, four comparisons present the current molecule first and four present the



                                                 33
proposed molecule first. If K votes favor the proposal, it is accepted according to
                                                                       
                                     ′                      ′     K
                          αPref (x, x ; K) = min 1, r0 (x, x )            .
                                                               N −K +1

Pointwise-MH uses the same LLM and medicinal-chemistry criterion but asks the judge to assign
each molecule an integer rating in {1, . . . , 10}. As with Pref-MH, we use N = 8 judge queries per
proposal and average the resulting ratings. The proposal is then accepted according to
                                       (                           )
                                                                ′) β
                                                       
                                                         sLLM (x
                  αPoint (x, x′ ) = min 1, r0 (x, x′ )                ,   β = 30.
                                                         sLLM (x)

Following the released MARS implementation, in this experiment we use the simplified convention
r0 (x, x′ ) = 1 for valid proposals, rather than explicitly evaluating the corresponding base/proposal
factor. We use the same convention for all three methods, so that the experiment isolates the effect
of the different guidance signals within the MARS molecular-editing framework.


Evaluation and results. We run each method for 1000 MCMC steps using 200 parallel chains
and repeat the experiment over 5 independent random seeds. We evaluate the final state of each
chain and report aggregate results as mean ± standard error across the independent runs.
We consider four complementary molecular-design metrics. QED [54] measures conventional drug-
likeness; SA [55] measures synthetic accessibility and is rescaled so that higher values correspond to
easier synthesis; and diversity is computed from pairwise Tanimoto similarities between Morgan
fingerprints, following Xie et al. [11]. Finally, we evaluate the generated molecules using MolSkill [33],
a learned proxy derived from pairwise preferences of professional medicinal chemists. MolSkill is
used only for evaluation and is not available to any of the methods during sampling.
As reported in Table 1, Pref-MH achieves the best MolSkill mean and median while maintaining
high synthetic accessibility, and molecular diversity. This suggests that pairwise LLM feedback
captures aspects of medicinal-chemistry follow-up preference that are not fully represented either by
the QED–SA objective used by MARS or by an elicited pointwise LLM score.


C.5    Machine translation

Finally, as an additional real-world evaluation, we consider machine translation and compare Pref-MH
against QUEST [43], a published MCMC method for quality-aware machine translation. QUEST uses
a learned scalar quality-estimation reward to tilt the base translation distribution, whereas Pref-MH
replaces this numerical acceptance signal with pairwise judgments. We additionally include a
pointwise LLM baseline which shares the generator, proposal, judge, and per-step query budget
with Pref-MH, but elicits absolute ratings rather than pairwise preferences.


Experimental setup. We evaluate on the WMT23 test sets [81] in both German→English and
English→German, using 549 and 557 paired source sentences, respectively. Following Faria et al.
[43], the base distribution p0 is TowerInstruct-7B-v0.2 [82], sampled at temperature τ = 0.8 with a
maximum of 256 new tokens.
All methods use the suffix-regeneration proposal of Faria et al. [43]. Given a current translation y
with n = |y| tokens, we sample an index i ∼ Unif{0, . . . , n − 1}, retain the prefix y<i , and regenerate

                                                   34
the remaining suffix from the base model conditioned on the source sentence. If n′ denotes the
length of the proposed translation, the corresponding base/proposal factor reduces to

                                                   p0 (y ′ )q(y | y ′ )   n
                                  r0 (y, y ′ ) =               ′
                                                                        = ′.
                                                   p0 (y)q(y | y)        n

Thus, all three samplers use the same proposal mechanism and differ only in how translation quality
enters the accept/reject decision.
For the LLM-guided methods, we use Qwen2.5-32B-Instruct [83] as the judge. The judge receives
the source sentence, the candidate translation or translations, and a reference-free quality estimate,
but is never shown the human reference. The quality-estimation (QE) signal is CometKiwi-XL
(wmt23-cometkiwi-da-xl) [84], the same reference-free QE model used by QUEST. We also provide
this score to the Pref-MH and Pointwise-MH judges so that all three methods have access to the
same quality-estimation information.


Sampling methods.        QUEST [43] uses the CometKiwi score to define a reward

                       r(y, x) = logit clip CometKiwi(y, x), 10−3 , 1 − 10−3
                                                                             


and targets the corresponding Gibbs-tilted distribution. Its acceptance rule is

                                                        r(y ′ , x) − r(y, x)
                                                                           
                                  ′            n
                      αQUEST (y, y ) = min 1, ′ exp                             .
                                               n                   β

The temperature parameter β controls the strength of the quality-reward tilt, with smaller values
placing greater weight on differences in the CometKiwi reward. We evaluate

                                 β ∈ {0.01, 0.02, 0.05, 0.1, 0.2, 0.5},

covering the range considered by Faria et al. [43].
Pref-MH uses N = 5 independent pairwise judgments for each proposal. The presentation order of
the current and proposed translations is randomized across queries. If K of the N votes favor the
proposal, the acceptance probability is
                                                                 
                                      ′              n     K
                           αPref (y, y ; K) = min 1, ′               .
                                                    n N −K +1

Pointwise-MH uses the same generator, proposal, QE input, judge model, prompt structure, and
N = 5 judge-query budget. The only change is that the judge evaluates one translation at a time
and returns an integer rating in {1, . . . , 10}. The N ratings are averaged to obtain s(y), and the
proposal is accepted according to
                                                 n n                    o
                          αPoint (y, y ′ ) = min 1, ′ exp s(y ′ ) − s(y) .
                                                     n
The score of the current state is cached, so the pointwise method uses the same number of judge
queries per proposal as Pref-MH.




                                                       35
Table 3: Machine-translation results on WMT23. Methods are evaluated using the chain-
mean protocol after 32 burn-in steps and 16 retained states per source sentence. Unmarked baseline
entries are significantly worse than Pref-MH at the 95% level; † denotes a baseline that is significantly
better, while ‡ denotes no significant difference.
                            German → English (n = 549)                 English → German (n = 557)
  Method
                   BLEU ↑      chrF ↑   TER ↓    XCOMET ↑     BLEU ↑      chrF ↑   TER ↓    XCOMET ↑
  QUEST (β=0.01)    35.83       63.29    51.94     .9017†      32.00       61.10    58.13     .8707†
  QUEST (β=0.02)    35.99       63.13    51.82     .9025†      32.39       61.31    57.70     .8700†
  QUEST (β=0.05)    36.94       63.38    51.08     .8952†      32.30       61.20    56.37     .8654†
  QUEST (β=0.1)     37.04       63.41    49.88     .8907‡      32.01       60.74    56.86     .8570†
  QUEST (β=0.2)     36.73       62.97    50.13      .8828      31.64       60.46    57.12      .8418
  QUEST (β=0.5)     36.94       62.97    49.95      .8763      30.91       59.87    57.54      .8278
  Pointwise-MH      37.44       63.31    49.26      .8755      31.46       60.37    56.82      .8252
  Pref-MH           39.59       65.30   47.57       .8886      34.09       62.98   54.07       .8521



Evaluation and results. Each chain is initialized with an ancestral sample from p0 and run for
128 steps, following Faria et al. [43]. We use a chain-mean evaluation protocol: the first 32 states are
discarded as burn-in, after which 16 evenly spaced states are retained and their evaluation scores
are averaged for each source sentence.
We report BLEU [85], chrF [86], and TER [87], computed using sacrebleu [88], together with
XCOMET-XL [89]. XCOMET-XL is a reference-based evaluator and is used only for evaluation;
neither it nor the human reference is available during sampling. Statistical significance is assessed
using paired bootstrap resampling over source sentences with 10,000 resamples, comparing each
baseline against Pref-MH at the 95% level.
Table 3 shows a consistent advantage for Pref-MH on the reference-based lexical metrics. It obtains
the best BLEU, chrF, and TER in both translation directions and significantly outperforms every
tested QUEST temperature as well as Pointwise-MH on all three metrics.
XCOMET exhibits a different trade-off. At smaller values of β, where QUEST places greater weight
on the CometKiwi reward, QUEST achieves higher XCOMET scores than Pref-MH. As β increases,
this advantage disappears and eventually reverses. This is consistent with XCOMET being more
closely aligned with the COMET-family quality-estimation signal directly optimized by QUEST.
Importantly, no tested QUEST configuration improves on Pref-MH simultaneously on XCOMET and
on any of BLEU, chrF, or TER. Thus, the preference judge appears to provide a signal that is not
reducible to maximizing the scalar QE reward and whose gains generalize across several independent
translation metrics.
The pointwise ablation further isolates the role of comparative feedback. Pref-MH significantly
outperforms Pointwise-MH on all four evaluation metrics in both translation directions, despite the
two methods sharing the same generator, proposal, QE information, judge model, and per-step
query budget.


C.6    Compute resources and assets

Compute resources. The synthetic validation experiment was run on CPU using an x86 64
machine with two Intel(R) Xeon(R) CPU cores at 2.20 GHz and 55 MiB of L3 cache. The


                                                    36
remaining experiments were run on an internal GPU cluster. We used machines with the following
configurations: 224 Intel(R) Xeon(R) 6746E CPU cores, 2.0 TB RAM, and eight NVIDIA H200
GPUs with 143 GB memory each; and 112 Intel(R) Xeon(R) 6746E CPU cores, 2.0 TB RAM, and
eight NVIDIA RTX PRO 6000 Blackwell GPUs with 96 GB memory each.
The machine-translation experiment required approximately 15 hours per translation direction, with
six H200 GPUs processing disjoint dataset shards in parallel. The image-generation experiment
required approximately 6 hours on the GPU cluster, while the multi-condition text experiment
required approximately 10–12 hours on a single GPU. The molecular-design experiment required
approximately 48 hours on the GPU cluster. No pretrained generative or judge model was fine-tuned;
the reported compute was dominated by model inference, judge queries, sampling, and evaluation.
Additional exploratory runs were used to refine the experimental setups but are not included in the
reported results.


Existing assets and licenses. Our experiments use existing models, datasets, codebases, and
evaluation tools. We use Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct under the Llama 3.1 Community License; WMT23
data for research use under the WMT23 General Machine Translation task terms; SDXL-Turbo
under the corresponding Stability AI license; Qwen3-VL-8B-Instruct under the Apache-2.0 license;
Qwen3-235B-A22B-Instruct-2507 under the Apache-2.0 license; and COMET/XCOMET under the
license specified by the corresponding Unbabel model release.
For the molecular-design experiment, we build on the official MARS implementation [11], including
its provided fragment vocabulary; the MARS repository is released under the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 license. We evaluate generated molecules using the official MolSkill
implementation of Choung et al. [33], which is released under the MIT License.




                                                37
D     Mathematical Proofs

D.1    Proof of Theorem 1

The proof of the following theorem draws connections to other known hardness results for unbiased
estimation of odds ratios [90–92].

Proof. Fix the pair (x, x′ ) and write

                                   p := pJ (x ≺ x′ ),         c := r0 (x, x′ ).

By assumption, c ∈ (0, ∞).
Suppose, toward a contradiction, that there exists a fixed-budget procedure using only the N binary
judge outcomes and additional internal randomness whose marginal acceptance probability is equal
to                                                             
                                                             p
                                  αBT-MH (p) = min 1, c
                                                           1−p
for every p ∈ (0, 1).
For each possible outcome vector z = (z1 , . . . , zN ) ∈ {0, 1}N , let a(z) ∈ [0, 1] denote the probability
that the procedure accepts after observing z, where the probability is taken only over the additional
internal randomness of the procedure. Since the procedure does not have access to the unknown
value of p, the function a is fixed as a function of the observed binary vector.
Because the judge queries are independent Bernoulli(p) trials, the probability of observing the vector
z is                                                       PN                PN
                       Pp (J (1) , . . . , J (N ) ) = z = p t=1 zt (1 − p)N − t=1 zt .
                                                       

Therefore, by summing over all possible binary outcome vectors, the marginal acceptance probability
of the procedure is                   X           PN                PN
                         AN (p) =           a(z) p t=1 zt (1 − p)N − t=1 zt .
                                      z∈{0,1}N

The right-hand side is a polynomial in p of degree at most N .
By the assumed correctness of the procedure, this polynomial must satisfy
                                                
                                             p
                       AN (p) = min 1, c               for all p ∈ (0, 1).
                                           1−p

Since c > 0, the interval 0 < p < 1/(1 + c) is nonempty. On this interval,
                                                      p
                                                 c       < 1,
                                                     1−p
and hence
                                                              p
                                            AN (p) = c           .
                                                             1−p
Equivalently,
                                         (1 − p)AN (p) − cp = 0
for every p ∈ (0, 1/(1 + c)).


                                                        38
Now define
                                        B(p) := (1 − p)AN (p) − cp.
Since AN (p) is a polynomial, B(p) is also a polynomial. We have just shown that
                                B(p) = 0         for every p ∈ (0, 1/(1 + c)).
Thus B has infinitely many roots, since every point in this interval is a root. But a nonzero
polynomial of finite degree can have only finitely many roots. Therefore B cannot be a nonzero
polynomial; it must be the zero polynomial. Hence
                                                   B(p) ≡ 0
as a polynomial identity.
In particular, this identity must also hold when evaluating the polynomial at p = 1. But
                                     B(1) = (1 − 1)AN (1) − c = −c,
so B(1) = 0 would imply c = 0, contradicting the assumption that c ∈ (0, ∞). Thus no such
fixed-budget procedure can exist.


D.2    Proof of Theorem 2

Proof. This theorem follows as the single-judge special case of the more general multi-judge exactness
result proved in Appx. D.5. Indeed, set m = 1 in the multi-judge construction. Then the composite
target
                                                    m
                                                    Y
                                    πm (x) ∝ p0 (x)    pJi (Mi | x)
                                                           i=1
reduces to
                                            π(x) ∝ p0 (x)pJ (M | x),
and the multi-judge acceptance rule
                                                                             m
                                                       (                                        )
                      (m)
                                                                             Y        ki
                     αN (x, x′ ; k1 , . . . , km ) = min    1, r0 (x, x′ )
                                                                                   N − ki + 1
                                                                             i=1

from observing the vote-count vector k = (k1 , . . . , km ), reduces exactly to the single-judge rule
                                                                          
                                  ′                           ′     K
                          αN (x, x ; K) = min 1, r0 (x, x )                  .
                                                                N −K +1

The multi-judge proof shows that, for every m ≥ 1, the corresponding marginal acceptance
probabilities satisfy
                                 (m)
                               ᾱN (x, x′ )   πm (x′ )q(x | x′ )
                                            =                    .
                                 (m)
                               ᾱ (x′ , x)    πm (x)q(x′ | x)
                                        N
Taking m = 1 gives
                                        ᾱN (x, x′ )   π(x′ )q(x | x′ )
                                                     =                  .
                                        ᾱN (x′ , x)   π(x)q(x′ | x)
Equivalently,
                            π(x)q(x′ | x)ᾱN (x, x′ ) = π(x′ )q(x | x′ )ᾱN (x′ , x),
which is detailed balance with respect to π. Hence the single-judge N -vote chain is reversible with
respect to π, and therefore has π as a stationary distribution.

                                                       39
D.3    Convergence of the Pref-MH chain

We give sufficient regularity conditions under which the stationary-distribution result of Theorem 2
yields convergence from an arbitrary initialization. Fix a comparison budget N ≥ 1. Averaging over
the random judge votes and the final accept/reject randomness, define the marginal acceptance
probability                                                                    
                                                                           K
                 ᾱN (x, y) := EK∼Binomial(N,pJ (x≺y)) min 1, r0 (x, y)             .            (13)
                                                                        N −K +1
The state sequence generated by Algorithm 1 is therefore a time-homogeneous Markov chain with
transition kernel
                          Z
              PN (x, A) =   [ᾱN (x, y)1{y ∈ A} + (1 − ᾱN (x, y)) 1{x ∈ A}] q(dy | x),  (14)
                             X

for every measurable set A ⊆ X .
Let S = supp(π).
Assumption 1 (Proposal regularity). The proposal kernel q satisfies the following conditions on S.

  1. π-irreducibility. For every x ∈ S and every measurable A ⊆ S with π(A) > 0, there exists
     m ≥ 1 such that
                                          q m (A | x) > 0,
      where q m (· | x) denotes the m-step kernel obtained by applying the proposal kernel successively,
      without an accept/reject step.

  2. Compatible support. For every x ∈ S,

                                    q({y ∈ S : r0 (x, y) ∈
                                                         / (0, ∞)} | x) = 0.

      In words, a proposal drawn from q(· | x) has a finite and strictly positive baseline ratio r0 (x, y)
      with probability one. In the discrete case, this simply requires r0 (x, y) ∈ (0, ∞) for every
      y ∈ S satisfying q(y | x) > 0. When the base density is positive on S, this corresponds to the
      usual forward–reverse support condition that an admissible forward proposal also admits the
      corresponding reverse proposal.

  3. Target absolute continuity. For every x ∈ S,

                                                 q(· | x) ≪ π.

      That is, any measurable set having zero probability under π also has zero proposal probability
      from every x ∈ S.

The judge requires no additional assumption here. Under the BT model in Section 3.1, the latent
score is finite-valued, s : X → R, and hence

                                  pJ (x ≺ y) = σ(s(y) − s(x)) ∈ (0, 1)

for every x, y ∈ X .
We next show that the marginal Pref-MH kernel inherits the required irreducibility and aperiodicity
properties from the proposal.

                                                   40
π-irreducibility. Fix x ∈ S and a proposed y for which r0 (x, y) ∈ (0, ∞), and write p = pJ (x ≺ y).
Since p ∈ (0, 1),
                                                                
                                                       r0 (x, y)
                       ᾱN (x, y) ≥ P(K = 1) min 1,
                                                           N
                                                                      
                                               N −1          r0 (x, y)
                                  = N p(1 − p)      min 1,               > 0.                  (15)
                                                                 N
Thus every admissible move of q has strictly positive marginal probability of being accepted by
Pref-MH. Consequently, if an m-step path of the proposal kernel reaches a measurable set A with
positive probability, then the event that the same m proposals are generated and accepted also has
positive probability. Hence
                               q m (A | x) > 0    =⇒   PNm (x, A) > 0.
By Assumption 1(1), PN is therefore π-irreducible on S.


Aperiodicity. For a proposed move x → y, the event K = 0 has probability (1 − pJ (x ≺ y))N > 0,
and on this event the proposal is rejected. Therefore,
                             Z
               PN (x, {x}) ≥    (1 − pJ (x ≺ y))N q(dy | x) > 0 for every x ∈ S.           (16)
                               S
Thus the chain has a positive probability of remaining at its current state. Together with π-
irreducibility, this implies that PN is aperiodic.

Proof of Corollary 1. Fix N ≥ 1. By Theorem 2, the marginal transition kernel PN satisfies detailed
balance with respect to π. Hence π is stationary for PN .
As shown above, Assumption 1 implies that PN is π-irreducible and aperiodic on S. The standard
general-state-space convergence theorem (Theorem 1 of Tierney [19]), therefore implies that there
exists a measurable set G ⊆ S with π(G) = 1 such that
                                PNt (x, ·) − π TV −→ 0      as t → ∞
for every x ∈ G [19, 46].
It remains to extend the conclusion from π-almost every initialization to every x ∈ S. Since
π(G) = 1, Assumption 1(3) gives
                                   q(G | x) = 1    for every x ∈ S.
Moreover, by (15), every admissible proposal has strictly positive marginal acceptance probability.
Thus, if x ∈
           / G, then while the chain remains at x, each transition has strictly positive probability
of accepting a proposal in G. Consequently, the hitting time
                                      τG := inf{t ≥ 0 : Xt ∈ G}
is finite almost surely.
Once the chain enters G, it remains in G: proposals lie in G almost surely by Assumption 1(3),
and rejection leaves the current state unchanged. Applying the Markov property at τG and the
convergence result on G therefore yields
                             PNt (x, ·) − π TV −→ 0      for every x ∈ S.
In particular, the law of Xt converges to π from every initialization in the support of π.

                                                  41
D.4     Proof of Theorem 3

Proof. This theorem follows by taking m = 1 in the multi-judge optimality result proved in Appx. D.5.
In the general multi-judge setting, a competing exact rule observes N binary comparisons from
each of m judges, and the multi-judge N -vote rule accepts a proposal after observing the vote-count
vector k = (k1 , . . . , km ) with probability
                                                                m
                                                 (                           )
                               (m)     ′                     ′
                                                                Y    ki
                              αN (x, x ; k) = min 1, r0 (x, x )                .
                                                                  N − ki + 1
                                                                i=1


Setting m = 1, the vote-count vector consists of a single count K, and the acceptance rule becomes
                                                                     
                                  ′                       ′     K
                          αN (x, x ; K) = min 1, r0 (x, x )             ,
                                                            N −K +1

which is exactly the single-judge N -vote rule.
The multi-judge optimality proof shows that, for every exact fixed-budget competitor using the
same proposal kernel and the same number of judge queries, the competitor’s marginal acceptance
probability is pointwise no larger than that of the multi-judge N -vote rule:
                     (m)              (m)
                   β̄N (x, x′ ) ≤ ᾱN (x, x′ )       for every proposed move x → x′ .

Taking m = 1 gives

                     β̄N (x, x′ ) ≤ ᾱN (x, x′ )   for every proposed move x → x′ .

Since the proposal kernel q is the same for both procedures, integrating this pointwise inequality
over any set A ⊆ X \ {x} gives
                                     Pcomp (x, A) ≤ PN⋆ (x, A).
Thus, from every current state x, the single-judge N -vote sampler assigns at least as much probability
as any exact fixed-budget competitor to moving into any set of states different from x. This is
precisely Peskun–Tierney domination. Therefore, the single-judge N -vote rule is optimal among
exact fixed-budget acceptance rules using the same proposal kernel and N judge queries.


D.5     Proofs for multiple judges

D.5.1    Multi-judge exactness

Theorem 4 (Exactness of the multi-judge N -vote acceptance rule). Under the multi-judge BT
parametric assumptions from Section 3.5, for every integer N ≥ 1, the multi-judge N -vote acceptance
rule in Eq. (12), combined with a valid proposal kernel q, defines a Markov transition kernel that
satisfies detailed balance with respect to the composite target πm . Consequently, the resulting chain
is reversible and has πm as a stationary distribution.

Proof. To prove exactness of the multi-judge rule, it is enough to verify detailed balance. In our
proposal–accept/reject setting, detailed balance means that for every pair x ̸= x′ ,
                                            (m)                             (m)
                       πm (x) q(x′ | x) ᾱN (x, x′ ) = πm (x′ ) q(x | x′ ) ᾱN (x′ , x),

                                                      42
         (m)
where ᾱN (x, x′ ) denotes the marginal probability of accepting x′ after it is proposed from x,
averaging over the random judge outcomes from all judges.
Fix a proposal pair (x, x′ ). We first dispose of degenerate proposal-ratio cases. If q(x′ | x) = 0,
                                           (m)
then the forward flow πm (x)q(x′ | x)ᾱN (x, x′ ) is zero. Moreover, if q(x | x′ ) > 0, then the reverse
baseline ratio r0 (x′ , x) is zero, so the reverse acceptance probability is zero for every realization of
the judge votes; if q(x | x′ ) = 0, the reverse proposal probability itself is zero. Thus detailed balance
is immediate.
Similarly, if q(x′ | x) > 0 but q(x | x′ ) = 0, then r0 (x, x′ ) = 0, so the forward acceptance probability
is zero for every vote realization, while the reverse flow is zero because q(x | x′ ) = 0. Hence detailed
balance is again immediate. The same conclusion holds if p0 (x′ ) = 0, since then πm (x′ ) = 0 and
r0 (x, x′ ) = 0.
Therefore, in the only nontrivial case, both proposal probabilities and both base probabilities are
positive, and hence
                                         0 < r0 (x, x′ ) < ∞.
We now restrict to this case.
Fix a proposal pair (x, x′ ), and write

                                   pi := pJi (x ≺ x′ ),              c := r0 (x, x′ ).

Thus, when the chain proposes x′ from x, the number of votes from judge Ji favoring x′ satisfies

                                                 Ki ∼ Binomial(N, pi ),

independently across judges. The realized acceptance probability after observing the vote-count
vector k = (k1 , . . . , km ) is
                                                           m
                                                     (                  )
                                  (m)
                                                           Y    k i
                                 αN (x, x′ ; k) = min 1, c                .
                                                             N − ki + 1
                                                                     i=1

Therefore,
                                   N             N                         m  
                    (m)
                                   X             X        (m)
                                                                           Y  N ki
                  ᾱN (x, x′ ) =           ···           αN (x, x′ ; k)          p (1 − pi )N −ki .
                                                                              ki i
                                   k1 =0         km =0                     i=1

For the reverse move from x′ to x, the comparison probability for judge i is 1 − pi , and

                                                 p0 (x) q(x′ | x)        1       1
                              r0 (x′ , x) =           ′         ′
                                                                   =         ′
                                                                                = .
                                                 p0 (x ) q(x | x )   r0 (x, x )  c

We will show that
                                                           m
                                     (m)
                                                           Y       pi    (m)
                                   ᾱN (x, x′ ) = c                    ᾱ (x′ , x).
                                                                 1 − pi N
                                                           i=1

We first record the identities that will be used in the sum below. For each ji = 1, . . . , N , the
binomial coefficients satisfy               
                                      N         N       ji
                                            =                 .
                                    ji − 1      ji N − ji + 1


                                                                43
Indeed,
                                                                                                       
              N                      N!                   N!          ji                                 N     ji
                         =                        =                           =                                         .
            ji − 1         (ji − 1)!(N − ji + 1)!   ji !(N − ji )! N − ji + 1                            ji N − j i + 1

Second, the forward and reverse realized acceptance probabilities satisfy
                                                                       m
                             (m)
                                                                       Y N − ji + 1            (m)
                            αN (x, x′ ; N − j + 1) = c                                        αN (x′ , x; j),
                                                                                   ji
                                                                       i=1

where j = (j1 , . . . , jm ) and N − j + 1 denotes the vector

                                              (N − j1 + 1, . . . , N − jm + 1).

To see this, note first that
                                                                                        m
                                                                             (                          )
                              (m)
                                                                                        Y N − ji + 1
                             αN (x, x′ ; N − j + 1) = min                    1, c                           ,
                                                                                                 ji
                                                                                        i=1

because N − (N − ji + 1) + 1 = ji for each coordinate i. For the reverse move, r0 (x′ , x) = 1/c, and
hence
                                                      m
                                              (                     )
                            (m) ′                  1Y         ji
                          αN (x , x; j) = min 1,                      .
                                                   c     N − ji + 1
                                                                                 i=1

Now set
                                                                 m
                                                                 Y N − ji + 1
                                                        A := c                           .
                                                                             ji
                                                                 i=1

Then
                 (m)                                                               (m)
                αN (x, x′ ; N − j + 1) = min{1, A},                               αN (x′ , x; j) = min{1, A−1 }.
Since, for every A > 0,
                                                  min{1, A} = A min{1, A−1 },
we obtain
                                                                       m
                             (m)
                                                                       Y N − ji + 1            (m)
                            αN (x, x′ ; N − j + 1) = c                                        αN (x′ , x; j).
                                                                                   ji
                                                                       i=1

We now use these identities to compare the marginal forward and reverse acceptance probabilities.
       (m)
Since αN (x, x′ ; k) = 0 whenever some ki = 0, we may restrict the sum to ki ≥ 1 for all i:

                                           N            N                              m  
                       (m)
                                           X            X        (m)
                                                                                       Y  N ki
                     ᾱN (x, x′ ) =               ···           αN (x, x′ ; k)               p (1 − pi )N −ki .
                                                                                          ki i
                                          k1 =1         km =1                          i=1

Substituting ki = N − ji + 1 for each i = 1, . . . , m gives
                             N            N                                            m       
            (m)                                    (m)                                      N
                                                                                                  pN −ji +1 (1 − pi )ji −1 .
                             X            X                                            Y
          ᾱN (x, x′ ) =            ···           αN (x, x′ ; N − j + 1)
                                                                                          ji − 1 i
                            j1 =1         jm =1                                        i=1




                                                                       44
Using the identities above, we have
                                                                  m         
                        (m)
                                                                 Y      N
                       αN (x, x′ ; N − j + 1)
                                                                      ji − 1
                                                                 i=1
                                    m                                                      m  
                                                                              !                                         !
                                    Y N − ji + 1                 (m)
                                                                                           Y  N               ji
                        =       c                               αN (x′ , x; j)
                                                   ji                                               ji     N − ji + 1
                                    i=1                                                    i=1
                                                         m  
                             (m)
                                                         Y  N
                        = c αN (x′ , x; j)                     .
                                                            ji
                                                         i=1

Therefore,
                                              N           N                             m  
                   (m)
                                              X           X       (m)
                                                                                        Y  N N −ji +1
                 ᾱN (x, x′ ) = c                  ···           αN (x′ , x; j)               p       (1 − pi )ji −1 .
                                                                                           ji i
                                           j1 =1         jm =1                          i=1
                 Qm
Factoring out      i=1 pi /(1 − pi ) gives

                                        m
                                                         ! N                N                            m  
               (m)
                                        Y       pi        X                 X        (m)
                                                                                                         Y  N N −ji
             ᾱN (x, x′ ) =         c                                 ···           αN (x′ , x; j)             p    (1 − pi )ji .
                                              1 − pi                                                        ji i
                                        i=1                   j1 =1         jm =1                        i=1

        (m)
Since αN (x′ , x; j) = 0 whenever some ji = 0, the sum on the right is exactly

                     N              N                                 m  
                     X              X       (m)
                                                                      Y  N N −ji                 (m)
                             ···           αN (x′ , x; j)                   p    (1 − pi )ji = ᾱN (x′ , x).
                                                                         ji i
                     j1 =0         jm =0                              i=1

Thus,
                                                                            m
                                                                                           !
                                            (m)
                                                                            Y       pi          (m)
                                          ᾱN (x, x′ ) =               c                       ᾱN (x′ , x).
                                                                                  1 − pi
                                                                            i=1

Finally, by the multi-judge Metropolis–Hastings ratio in (11),
                                                        m
                                                        Y       pi     πm (x′ ) q(x | x′ )
                                                   c                 =                     .
                                                              1 − pi   πm (x) q(x′ | x)
                                                        i=1

Substituting this into the previous display and multiplying both sides by πm (x)q(x′ | x) gives
                                                          (m)                                                  (m)
                             πm (x) q(x′ | x) ᾱN (x, x′ ) = πm (x′ ) q(x | x′ ) ᾱN (x′ , x),

which is detailed balance with respect to πm . Hence the induced multi-judge Markov chain is
reversible with respect to πm , and πm is stationary.


D.5.2    Convergence of the multi-judge Pref-MH chain

Corollary 2 (Convergence of the multi-judge Pref-MH chain). Fix N ≥ 1. Under Assumption 1,
with π replaced by πm , the Markov chain generated by the multi-judge Pref-MH algorithm converges
in total variation to πm from every initialization in supp(πm ).


                                                                              45
Proof. By the multi-judge exactness result, the corresponding Markov chain is reversible with
respect to πm , and hence πm is stationary.
The irreducibility and aperiodicity arguments from Section D.3 apply directly. Under the multi-judge
BT model, each judge satisfies
                                                      
                       pJi (x ≺ y) = σ si (y) − si (x) ∈ (0, 1), i = 1, . . . , m.

Thus every admissible proposal has strictly positive marginal probability of being accepted; for
example, the event K1 = · · · = Km = 1 has positive probability and yields a strictly positive
acceptance factor. Hence the chain inherits πm -irreducibility from the proposal kernel.
Moreover, if Ki = 0 for any judge i, then the product acceptance factor is zero. Since this event has
positive probability, the chain has a positive self-transition probability and is therefore aperiodic.
Finally, Assumption 1(3), with π replaced by πm , allows the same full-measure-set argument used
in the proof of Corollary 1 to extend convergence to every initialization in supp(πm ). Therefore the
chain converges in total variation to πm from every such initialization.


D.5.3    Multi-judge optimality

Theorem 5 (Peskun–Tierney optimality of the multi-judge N -vote rule). Fix a proposal kernel
q and a comparison budget N ≥ 1 per judge. Among all exact acceptance rules satisfying detailed
balance with respect to πm , that use the same proposal kernel and only the outcomes of exactly N
judge queries per judge per proposal, the multi-judge N -vote rule Peskun–Tierney dominates every
competitor. Equivalently, for every proposed move x → x′ , we have

        Pmulti-judge N -vote (accept x′ | x, x′ proposed) ≥ Pcompetitor (accept x′ | x, x′ proposed).

Proof. Fix a proposed move x → x′ , and write

                                   pi := pJi (x ≺ x′ ),                 c := r0 (x, x′ ).

Thus the reverse move x′ → x has comparison probability 1 − pi for judge i, and baseline factor 1/c.
We first describe the form of any competing rule that uses exactly N binary queries from each
of the m judges. Such a rule may depend on the full collection of comparison outcomes and may
also use additional internal randomness. After averaging over any such internal randomness, let
bk (x, x′ ) ∈ [0, 1], for k = (k1 , . . . , km ), denote the probability that the competitor accepts the
proposal x′ when exactly ki of the N queries to judge Ji favor x′ , for each i = 1, . . . , m.
Since the number of votes from judge Ji favoring x′ is Ki ∼ Binomial(N, pi ), independently across
judges, the competitor’s marginal acceptance probability can be written as
                                      N             N                  m  
                       (m)
                                      X             X                  Y  N ki
                     β̄N (x, x′ ) =           ···                   ′
                                                            bk (x, x )       p (1 − pi )N −ki .
                                                                          ki i
                                      k1 =0         km =0               i=1

Similarly, for the reverse move,
                                      N             N                  m  
                       (m)                                                N                 −ji
                                                                             (1 − pi )ji pN
                                      X             X                  Y
                     β̄N (x′ , x) =           ···               ′
                                                            bj (x , x)                    i     .
                                                                          ji
                                      j1 =0         jm =0               i=1


                                                              46
Because the competitor is assumed to satisfy detailed balance with respect to πm , its marginal
acceptance probabilities must obey
                                                       (m)                                            (m)
                             πm (x) q(x′ | x) β̄N (x, x′ ) = πm (x′ ) q(x | x′ ) β̄N (x′ , x).

Equivalently,
                                        (m)                  πm (x′ )q(x | x′ ) (m) ′
                                       β̄N (x, x′ ) =                          β̄ (x , x).
                                                             πm (x)q(x′ | x) N
By the multi-judge Bradley–Terry odds identity and the definition of r0 ,
                                                                                m
                                    πm (x′ )q(x | x′ )           ′
                                                                     Y pJ (x ≺ x′ )
                                                                          i
                                                       = r0 (x, x  )                    .
                                    πm (x)q(x′ | x)                   1 − pJi (x ≺ x′ )
                                                                                i=1

Writing c = r0 (x, x′ ) and pi = pJi (x ≺ x′ ), we obtain
                                                                  m
                                                                                    !
                                         (m)
                                                                  Y       pi                (m)
                                       β̄N (x, x′ ) =         c                         β̄N (x′ , x).
                                                                        1 − pi
                                                                  i=1


Substituting the two expressions for the marginal acceptance probabilities gives
                       N            N             m  
                       X            X            Y
                                                   ′  N ki
                            ···       bk (x, x )         p (1 − pi )N −ki
                                                      ki i
                      k1 =0     km =0            i=1
                              m
                                          ! N         N             m  
                             Y pi                                      N                 −ji
                                                                          (1 − pi )ji pN
                                             X        X             Y
                                                              ′
                      = c                         ···    bj (x , x)                    i     .
                                  1 − pi                               ji
                               i=1             j1 =0         jm =0                    i=1

Since the rule must be exact for the unknown comparison probabilities pi ∈ (0, 1), this identity
holds as an identity in (p1 , . . . , pm ).
To compare the two sides cleanly, set
                                                          pi
                                              ti :=            ,           i = 1, . . . , m.
                                                        1 − pi
                                                                           Qm                N
Since each pi ∈ (0, 1), we may divide both sides by                             i=1 (1 − pi ) . On the left, each term becomes
                                                                ki
                                pki i (1 − pi )N −ki
                                                       
                                                           pi
                                                     =              = tki i .
                                      (1 − pi )N         1 − pi
                                                  Q
On the right, after incorporating the factor i pi /(1 − pi ), each coordinate contributes
                                  −ji +1                                         N −ji +1
                               pN        (1 − pi )ji −1
                                                                   
                                                                         pi
                                i
                                                        =                                         = tiN −ji +1 .
                                    (1 − pi )N                         1 − pi
Thus we obtain the polynomial identity
             N             N                  m          N     N            m  
             X             X
                                         ′
                                              Y  N ki      X     X
                                                                        ′
                                                                              Y  N N −ji +1
                     ···           bk (x, x )       ti = c   ···   bj (x , x)       t       .
                                                 ki                              ji i
             k1 =0         km =0             i=1                        j1 =0         jm =0              i=1


We first note that this identity forces zero acceptance whenever at least one judge gives zero votes
in favor of the proposed move. Indeed, suppose that some coordinate ji = 0 on the right-hand side.

                                                                     47
Then the corresponding term contains the power tN    i
                                                       +1
                                                          . No term on the left-hand side contains a
power of ti larger than N . Since the identity holds as a polynomial identity, the coefficient of every
such monomial must be zero. Hence

                                              bj (x′ , x) = 0               whenever some ji = 0.

Similarly, no term on the right-hand side contains a power t0i , so

                                              bk (x, x′ ) = 0               whenever some ki = 0.

We may therefore restrict attention to indices with all coordinates at least one. The polynomial
identity becomes
                N             N                      m          N     N             m  
                X             X                      Y  N ki      X     X             Y  N N −ji +1
                        ···           bk (x, x′ )          ti = c   ···   bj (x′ , x)       t       .
                                                        ki                               ji i
                k1 =1         km =1                  i=1                          j1 =1      jm =1            i=1


Now reindex the right-hand side coordinatewise by setting

                                                    ki = N − ji + 1,                      i = 1, . . . , m.

Equivalently,
                                                                  ji = N − ki + 1.
As ji ranges from 1 to N , so does ki . Therefore,
                                      N             N                  m  
                                      X             X
                                                                  ′
                                                                       Y  N N −ji +1
                                  c           ···           bj (x , x)       t
                                                                          ji i
                                      j1 =1         jm =1                  i=1
                                            N              N                               m               
                                            X              X                               Y         N
                                   =c               ···           bN −k+1 (x′ , x)                           tki ,
                                                                                                  N − ki + 1 i
                                          k1 =1           km =1                            i=1

where N − k + 1 denotes the vector

                                                      (N − k1 + 1, . . . , N − km + 1).

Thus
        N             N                     m          N     N                  m           
        X             X                     Y  N ki      X     X                  Y     N
                ···           bk (x, x′ )         ti = c   ···   bN −k+1 (x′ , x)               tki .
                                               ki                                    N − ki + 1 i
        k1 =1         km =1                 i=1                           k1 =1      km =1                     i=1


This equality holds for all ti > 0, i = 1, . . . , m. Since both sides are polynomials in (t1 , . . . , tm ),
their coefficients must agree. Hence, for every k = (k1 , . . . , km ) with ki ≥ 1 for all i,
                                   m                           m              
                                ′
                                   Y  N                   ′
                                                               Y          N
                        bk (x, x )        = c bN −k+1 (x , x)                     .
                                      ki                              N − ki + 1
                                                i=1                                              i=1

Because bN −k+1 (x′ , x) ≤ 1, we get
                                                                                  m          N
                                                                                                   
                                                                                          N −ki +1
                                                                                  Y
                                                                      ′
                                                           bk (x, x ) ≤ c                    N
                                                                                                      .
                                                                                  i=1        ki


                                                                              48
Using                                                                                   
                                                        N                             N
                                                                            =                ,
                                                     N − ki + 1                     ki − 1
this becomes
                                                         m        N                 m
                                                                        
                                             ′
                                                         Y       ki −1
                                                                                    Y        ki
                                     bk (x, x ) ≤ c               N
                                                                            =c                       .
                                                                                          N − ki + 1
                                                                     
                                                         i=1      ki                i=1

Since bk (x, x′ ) is an acceptance probability, we also have bk (x, x′ ) ≤ 1. Therefore, for every vote-count
vector k = (k1 , . . . , km ),
                                                                            m
                                                                 (                               )
                                                                            Y        ki
                                       bk (x, x′ ) ≤ min 1, c                                        .
                                                                                  N − ki + 1
                                                                            i=1

For vectors with some ki = 0, this also holds because we already showed bk (x, x′ ) = 0.
But the right-hand side is exactly the realized acceptance probability of the multi-judge N -vote rule
after observing the vote-count vector k:
                                              m                            m
                              (                            )       (                     )
           (m)
                                              Y     k i
                                                                          Y       k i
          αN (x, x′ ; k) = min 1, r0 (x, x′ )                = min 1, c                    .
                                                N − ki + 1                    N − ki + 1
                                                           i=1                                            i=1

Thus,
                                             (m)
                             bk (x, x′ ) ≤ αN (x, x′ ; k)                  for every k = (k1 , . . . , km ).

Averaging over the independent vote counts Ki ∼ Binomial(N, pi ), and using that all binomial
probabilities are nonnegative, gives
                                         N             N                     m  
                       (m)
                                         X             X                     Y  N ki
                     β̄N (x, x′ ) =              ···           bk (x, x′ )         p (1 − pi )N −ki
                                                                                ki i
                                         k1 =0         km =0                 i=1
                                         N             N                              m  
                                         X             X         (m)
                                                                                      Y  N ki
                                     ≤           ···           αN (x, x′ ; k)               p (1 − pi )N −ki .
                                                                                         ki i
                                         k1 =0         km =0                          i=1

The right-hand side is precisely the marginal acceptance probability of the multi-judge N -vote rule:
                             (m)
                         ᾱN (x, x′ ) = Pmulti-judge N -vote (accept x′ | x, x′ proposed).

Therefore,
                                                                                      (m)                (m)
                        Pcomp (accept x′ | x, x′ proposed) = β̄N (x, x′ ) ≤ ᾱN (x, x′ )
                                   = Pmulti-judge N -vote (accept x′ | x, x′ proposed).

It remains to translate this acceptance-probability dominance into the Peskun–Tierney comparison
of the resulting Markov chains. Let PN,m ⋆   denote the one-step transition rule of the multi-judge
N -vote sampler, meaning the distribution of the next state after one proposal and accept/reject
                                                                                          ⋆ (x, A)
step, and let Pcomp denote the one-step transition rule of the competing sampler. Thus, PN,m
is the probability that the multi-judge N -vote chain moves from the current state x into a set of
states A in one step, and Pcomp (x, A) is the corresponding probability for the competitor.
Peskun–Tierney domination compares the probabilities of moving away from the current state.
Therefore, consider any set A ⊆ X \ {x}, so that A contains only states different from the current

                                                                       49
state. Since both samplers use the same proposal kernel q, the only difference between them is the
probability of accepting a proposed state. Hence
                                             Z
                                 ⋆               (m)
                               PN,m (x, A) =   ᾱN (x, y) q(dy | x),
                                                     A

        (m)
where ᾱN (x, y) is the marginal probability that the multi-judge N -vote rule accepts y after it is
proposed from x. Similarly,
                                             Z
                                                  (m)
                              Pcomp (x, A) =    β̄N (x, y) q(dy | x),
                                                     A

        (m)
where β̄N (x, y) is the marginal acceptance probability of the competing rule.
From the pointwise argument above, we have shown that for every proposed move x → y,
                                            (m)               (m)
                                          β̄N (x, y) ≤ ᾱN (x, y).

Because q(dy | x) is the same nonnegative proposal measure for both samplers, integrating this
inequality over A gives
                                                  ⋆
                                  Pcomp (x, A) ≤ PN,m (x, A).
Thus, from every current state x, the multi-judge N -vote sampler assigns at least as much probability
as the competitor to moving into any set of different states. This is exactly the Peskun–Tierney
domination condition. Therefore, the multi-judge N -vote rule Peskun–Tierney dominates every
exact fixed-budget competitor.


E     Conditional Target Derivation

We derive the product-form target used in the multi-condition setting. Let X denote the space of
candidate objects, and let p0 be the base distribution over X , with density or mass function also
denoted by p0 . Let M1 , . . . , Mm denote the desired conditions, and let J1 , . . . , Jm be the associated
judges. For each condition Mi , we write pJi (Mi | x) for the judge-induced probability, or likelihood
factor, that x satisfies Mi according to judge Ji .
We consider the joint model in which x ∼ p0 , and the judge-induced events M1 , . . . , Mm are
conditionally independent given x:
                                                               m
                                                               Y
                                  pJ (M1 , . . . , Mm | x) =         pJi (Mi | x).                     (17)
                                                               i=1

Equivalently,
                           pJ (Mi | x, M−i ) = pJi (Mi | x),             i = 1, . . . , m,             (18)
where M−i denotes all conditions except Mi .
By Bayes’ rule, the conditional distribution induced by the base model and the judges is
                                                   p0 (x) pJ (M1 , . . . , Mm | x)
                       p(x | M1 , . . . , Mm ) = R                                                     (19)
                                                X p0 (u) pJ (M1 , . . . , Mm | u) dµ(u)
                                                   p0 (x) m
                                                          Q
                                                             i=1 pJi (Mi | x)
                                             = R         Q m                        .                  (20)
                                                X p0 (u)   i=1 pJi (Mi | u) dµ(u)


                                                         50
Thus, defining
                                        m
                                        Y                              Z
                    π̃m (x) := p0 (x)         pJi (Mi | x),    Zm :=       π̃m (u) dµ(u),   (21)
                                        i=1                            X

we obtain the normalized target
                                                               m
                                              π̃m (x)          Y
                              πm (x) :=               ∝ p0 (x)   pJi (Mi | x).              (22)
                                                Zm
                                                              i=1

When the judge likelihoods satisfy pJi (Mi | x) ∝ exp(si (x)), this becomes
                                                       m
                                                                 !
                                                      X
                                 πm (x) ∝ p0 (x) exp       si (x) ,                         (23)
                                                              i=1

which is the multi-condition target used in the main text.




                                                        51
